THE  GRESHAM  PUBLISHING  COMPANY 
34  SOUTHAMPTON  ST.  STRAND  LONDON 


THE  LIBRARY 
BiilGHArd  YOUNG  UNIVERSI'T 
PROVO,  LTAH 


PREFACE 


This  book  is  what  its  author  believes  to  be  the  only 
attempt  yet  made  to  put  the  English  reader  into  posses- 
sion, in  clear,  compact,  and  what  it  is  hoped  may  prove 
agreeable,  form,  of  the  mythical,  legendary,  and  poetic 
traditions  of  the  earliest  inhabitants  of  our  islands  who 
have  left  us  written  records — the  Gaelic  and  the  British 
Celts.  It  is  true  that  admirable  translations  and  para- 
phrases of  much  of  Gaelic  mythical  saga  have  been  recently 
published,  and  that  Lady  Charlotte  Guest's  translation  of 
the  Mabinogion  has  been  placed  within  the  reach  of  the 
least  wealthy  reader.  But  these  books  not  merely  each 
cover  a  portion  only  of  the  whole  ground,  but,  in  addition, 
contain  little  elucidatory  matter.  Their  characters  stand 
isolated  and  unexplained;  and  the  details  that  would  ex- 
plain them  must  be  sought  for  with  considerable  trouble 
in  the  lectures  and  essays  of  scholars  to  learned  societies. 
The  reader  to  whom  this  literature  is  entirely  new  is 
introduced,  as  it  were,  to  numerous  people  of  whose  ante- 
cedents he  knows  nothing;  and  the  effect  is  often  dis- 
concerting enough  to  make  him  lay  down  the  volume  in 
despair. 

But  here  he  will  at  last  make  the  formal  acquaintance 
of  all  the  chief  characters  of  Celtic  myth:  of  the  Gaelic 
gods  and  the  giants  against  whom  they  struggled;  of  the 
"Champions  of  the  Red  Branch"  of  Ulster,  heroes  of  a 
martial  epopee  almost  worthy  to  be  placed  beside  "the 
tale  of  Troy  divine";  and  of  Finn  and  his  Fenians.  He 
will  meet  also  with  the  divine  and  heroic  personages  of 


VI  Preface 

the  ancient  Britons:  with  their  earliest  gods,  kin  to  the 
members  of  the  Gaelic  Pantheon;  as  well  as  with  Arthur 
and  his  Knights,  whom  he  will  recognize  as  no  mortal 
champions,  but  belonging  to  the  same  mythic  company. 
Of  all  these  mighty  figures  the  histories  will  be  briefly 
recorded,  from  the  time  of  their  unquestioned  godhood, 
through  their  various  transformations,  to  the  last  doubtful, 
dying  recognition  of  them  in  the  present  day,  as  "  fairies  ". 
Thus  the  volume  will  form  a  kind  of  handbook  to  a  subject 
of  growing  importance — the  so-called  "Celtic  Renaissance", 
which  is,  after  all,  no  more — and,  indeed,  no  less — than 
an  endeavour  to  refresh  the  vitality  of  English  poetry  at 
its  most  ancient  native  fount. 

The  book  does  not,  of  course,  profess  to  be  for  Celtic 
scholars,  to  whom,  indeed,  its  author  himself  owes  all  that 
is  within  it.  It  aims  only  at  interesting  the  reader  familiar 
with  the  mythologies  of  Greece,  Rome,  and  Scandinavia 
in  another,  and  a  nearer,  source  of  poetry.  Its  author's 
wish  is  to  offer  those  who  have  fallen,  or  will  fall,  under 
the  attraction  of  Celtic  legend  and  romance,  just  such  a 
volume  as  he  himself  would  once  have  welcomed,  and  for 
which  he  sought  in  vain.  It  is  his  hope  that,  in  choosing 
from  the  considerable,  though  scattered,  translations  and 
commentaries  of  students  of  Old  Gaelic  and  Old  Welsh, 
he  has  chosen  wisely,  and  that  his  readers  will  be  able, 
should  they  wish,  to  use  his  book  as  a  stepping-stone  to 
the  authorities  themselves.  To  that  end  it  is  wholly 
directed;  and  its  marginal  notes  and  short  bibliographical 
appendix  follow  the  same  plan.  They  do  not  aspire  to 
anything  like  completeness,  but  only  to  point  out  the  chief 
sources  from  which  he  himself  has  drawn. 

To  acknowledge,  as  far  as  possible,  such  debts  is  now 
the  author's  pleasing  duty.  First  and  foremost,  he  has 
relied  upon  the  volumes  of  M.  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's 
Cours  de  Litteratiire  celtique,  and  the  Hibbert  Lectures 
for  1886  of  John  Rhys,  Professor  of  Celtic  in  the  Univer- 


Preface  vii 

sity  of  Oxford,  with  their  sequel  entitled  Studies  in  the 
Arthurian  Legend.  From  the  writings  of  Mr.  Alfred  Nutt 
he  has  also  obtained  much  help.  With  regard  to  direct 
translations,  it  seems  almost  superfluous  to  refer  to  Lady 
Charlotte  Guest's  Mabinogion  and  Mr.  W.  F.  Skene's  Four 
Ancient  Books  of  Wales,  or  to  the  work  of  such  well-known 
Gaelic  scholars  as  Mr.  Eugene  O'Curry,  Dr.  Kuno  Meyer, 
Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  Dr.  Ernest  Windisch,  Mr.  Standish 
Hayes  O'Grady  (to  mention  no  others),  as  contained  in 
such  publications  as  the  Revue  Celtique,  the  Atlantis,  and 
the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society ^  in  Mr.  O 'Grady's 
Silva  Gadelica,  Mr.  Nutt's  Voyage  of  Bran,  Son  of  Febal, 
and  Miss  Hull's  Cuchullin  Saga.  But  space  is  lacking  to 
do  justice  to  all.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  marginal 
notes  and  the  Appendix  for  the  works  of  these  and  other 
authors,  who  will  no  doubt  pardon  the  use  made  of  their 
researches  to  one  whose  sole  object  has  been  to  gain  a 
larger  audience  for  the  studies  they  have  most  at  heart. 

Finally,  perhaps,  a  word  should  be  said  upon  that  vexed 
question,  the  transliteration  of  Gaelic.  As  yet  there  is 
no  universal  or  consistent  method  of  spelling.  The  author 
has  therefore  chosen  the  forms  which  seemed  most  familiar 
to  himself,  hoping  in  that  way  to  best  serve  the  uses  of 
others. 


CONTENTS 


Chap.  Page 

I.  The    Interest    and    Importance    of    Celtic 

Mythology i 

II.  The  Sources  of  our  Knowledge  of  the  Celtic 

Mythology 8 

III.  Who  were  the  "Ancient  Britons"?         .       .  i8 

IV.  The  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  and 

Druidism 31 

THE   GAELIC   GODS  AND   THEIR  STORIES 

V.  The  Gods  of  the  Gaels 47 

VI.  The  Gods  Arrive 65 

VII.  The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God 78 

VIII.  The  Gaelic  Argonauts 89 

IX.  The  War  with  the  Giants 107 

X.  The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals  .       .119 

XI.  The  Gods  in  Exile 132 

XII.  The  Irish  Iliad 153 

XIII.  Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories 184 

XIV.  Finn  and  the  Fenians 201 

XV.  The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        .       .  227 

THE   BRITISH   GODS   AND   THEIR  STORIES 

XVI.  The  Gods  of  the  Britons 251 

XVII.  The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades  .       .  278 

XVIII.  The  Wooing  of  Branwen  and  the  Beheading 

of  Bran 289 

ix 


X  Contents 

Chap.  Page 

XIX.  The  War  of  Enchantments         ....  298 

XX.  The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness  .       .  305 

XXI.  The  Mythological  "Coming  of  Arthur"        .  312 

XXII.  The  Treasures  of  Britain 336 

XXIII.  The  Gods  as  King  Arthur's  Knights        .       .  354 

XXIV.  The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        .       .371 

SURVIVALS   OF   THE    CELTIC   PAGANISM 

XXV.  Survivals    of     the     Celtic     Paganism     into 

Modern  Times 399 

Appendix.       . 419 

Index 425 

Table  of   Pronunciation   for  the   More  Difficult 

Words 447 


PLATES    IN    COLOUR 


Page 
OSSIAN    AND    NIAMH    OF   THE    GOLDEN    HAIR-         -  Frontispiece 
From  the  fainting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 

CUCHULAINN    MEETS   THE    MORRIGU  -         -  facing     i68 

From  the  painting  by  y.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 

THE    MAKING   OF    BLODEUWEDD  -        -        -        -    „         264 

From  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 

LISTENING     TO     THE     PLEASANT     CONVERSATION 

OF    BRAN'S    HEAD ,,296 

From  the  painting  by  J.  H-  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 


PLATES    IN    MONOCHROME 

Page 

CELTIC    WORSHIP facing     32 

From  the  drawing  by  E.  fVallcomim 

PORTION    OF   THE    CIRCLES,    STONEHENGE     -         -  ,,42 

LUGH'S   MAGIC   SPEAR  --_..„  ,,62 

From  a  drawing  by  H.  R.  Millar 

BRIAN    SEIZES   THE    PIG-SKIN „       100 

From  the  -painting  by  J.  H,  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A, 

«THE    KISSING   STONE",    CARROWMORE,    SLIGO    -  ,,114 

ENTRANCE     TO     THE     GREAT     CAIRN     OF     NEW 

GRANGE,   ON    THE    BOYNE,  NEAR    DROGHEDA  „       136 

LER   AND    THE    SWANS »       i44 

From  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 

QUEEN    MEDB'S   CAIRN,    KNOCKNAREA,   SLIGO       -  ,,164 

CUCHULAINN   REBUKED    BY   EMER  -         -        -        -  „       186 

From  a  drawing  by  H.  R.  Millar 

DEIRDRE'S   LAMENT     -------  ,,198 

From  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 

OSSIAN'S    CAVE,    GLENCOE ,,208 


FINN    FINDS   THE    SALMON    OF    KNOWLEDGE         -  „       210 

From  a  draiving  by  H.  R.  Millar 
xiii 


xiv  Plates  in  Monochrome 

Page 
CIAN    FINDS    BALOR'S    DAUGHTER    -        -         -         -       Jacing  236 
From  a  draiuing  by  H.  R.  Millar 

GWYDION    CONQUERS    PRYDERI         -         -         ,,         .  ,,310 

From  a  draiving  by  E.  Wallcouiins 

KING   ARTHUR'S    CASTLE,   TINTAGEL       - 


THE    TREASURES   OF    BRITAIN  - 

From  a  draiving  by  E.  ffallcousim 

THE    BEGUILING   OF    MERLIN    - 

THE    CAULDRON   OF   INSPIRATION  - 

From  a  draiving  by  E.  fVallcomins 


SIR   GALAHAD ,,368 

From  the  picture  by  G.  F.  fVattSj  R.A» 

LEAR   AND    CORDELIA  -.-...  ,,382 

From  the  picture  by  Ford  Madux  Broivn 


»> 

320 

» 

352 

» 

360 

»» 

366 

THE   MYTHOLOGY  OF  THE 
BRITISH   ISLANDS 


CHAPTER   I 

THE    INTEREST   AND    IMPORTANCE   OF    CELTIC 
MYTHOLOGY 

It  should  hardly  be  necessary  to  remind  the 
reader  of  what  profound  interest  and  value  to  every 
nation  are  its  earliest  legendary  and  poetical  records. 
The  beautiful  myths  of  Greece  form  a  sufficing  ex- 
ample. In  threefold  manner,  they  have  influenced 
the  destiny  of  the  people  that  created  them,  and  of 
the  country  of  which  they  were  the  imagined  theatre. 
First,  in  the  ages  in  which  they  were  still  fresh, 
belief  and  pride  in  them  were  powerful  enough  to 
bring  scattered  tribes  into  confederation.  Secondly, 
they  gave  the  inspiration  to  sculptor  and  poet  of  an 
art  and  literature  unsurpassed,  if  not  unequalled,  by 
any  other  age  or  race.  Lastly,  when  **  the  glory 
that  was  Greece  "  had  faded,  and  her  people  had,  by 
dint  of  successive  invasions,  perhaps  even  ceased 
to  have  any  right  to  call  themselves  Hellenes,  they 
have  passed  over  into  the  literatures  of  the  modern 

(B219)  1  A 


2  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

world,  and  so  given  to  Greece  herself  a  poetic 
interest  that  still  makes  a  petty  kingdom  of  greater 
account  in  the  eyes  of  its  compeers  than  many 
others  far  superior  to  it  in  extent  and  resources. 

This  permeating  influence  of  the  Greek  poetical 
mythology,  apparent  in  all  civilized  countries,  has 
acted  especially  upon  our  own.  From  almost  the 
very  dawn  of  English  literature,  the  Greek  stories  of 
gods  and  heroes  have  formed  a  large  part  of  the 
stock-in-trade  of  English  poets.  The  inhabitants  of 
Olympus  occupy,  under  their  better-known  Latin 
names,  almost  as  great  a  space  in  English  poetry  as 
they  did  in  that  of  the  countries  to  which  they  were 
native.  From  Chaucer  downwards,  they  have  capti- 
vated the  imagination  alike  of  the  poets  and  their 
hearers.  The  magic  cauldron  of  classic  myth  fed, 
like  the  Celtic  "  Grail ",  all  who  came  to  it  for 
sustenance. 

At  last,  however,  its  potency  became  somewhat 
exhausted.  Alien  and  exotic  to  English  soil,  it 
degenerated  slowly  into  a  convention.  In  the 
shallow  hands  of  the  poetasters  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  its  figures  became  mere  puppets.  With 
every  wood  a  "grove",  and  every  rustic  maid  a 
*'  nymph ",  one  could  only  expect  to  find  Venus 
armed  with  patch  and  powder-puff,  Mars  shouldering 
a  musket,  and  Apollo  inspiring  the  versifier's  own 
trivial  strains.  The  affectation  killed — and  fortu- 
nately killed — a  mode  of  expression  which  had  be- 
come obsolete.  Smothered  by  just  ridicule,  and 
abandoned  to  the  commonplace  vocabulary  of  the 
inferior  hack-writer,  classic  myth  became  a  subject 


\ 


Importance  of  Celtic  Mythology  3 

which  only  the  greatest  poets  could  afford  to 
handle. 

But  mythology  is  of  such  vital  need  to  literature 
that,  deprived  of  the  store  of  legend  native  to 
southern  Europe,  imaginative  writers  looked  for  a 
fresh  impulse.  They  turned  their  eyes  to  the  North. 
Inspiration  was  sought,  not  from  Olympus,  but  from 
Asgard.  Moreover,  it  was  believed  that  the  fount 
of  primeval  poetry  issuing  from  Scandinavian  and 
Teutonic  myth  was  truly  our  own,  and  that  we  were 
rightful  heirs  of  it  by  reason  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  in 
our  blood.  And  so,  indeed,  we  are;  but  it  is  not 
our  sole  heritage.  There  must  also  run  much  Celtic 
— that  is,  truly  British — blood  in  our  veins. ^  And 
Matthew  Arnold  was  probably  right  in  asserting 
that,  while  we  owe  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  the  more 
practical  qualities  that  have  built  up  the  British 
Empire,  we  have  inherited  from  the  Celtic  side  that 
poetic  vision  which  has  made  English  literature  the 
most  brilliant  since  the  Greek. ^ 

We  have  the  right,  therefore,  to  enter  upon  a  new 
spiritual  possession.  And  a  splendid  one  it  is!  The 
Celtic  mythology  has  little  of  the  heavy  crudeness 
that  repels  one  in  Teutonic  and  Scandinavian  story. 


^  "There  is  good  ground  to  believe",  writes  Mr.  E.  W.  B.  Nicholson,  M.A.,  the 
librarian  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  in  the  preface  to  his  recently-published  Keltic 
Researches,  "that  Lancashire,  West  Yorkshire,  Staffordshire,  Worcestershire, 
Warwickshire,  Leicestershire,  Rutland,  Cambridgeshire,  Wiltshire,  Somerset,  and 
part  of  Sussex,  are  as  Keltic  as  Perthshire  and  North  Munster;  that  Cheshire, 
Shropshire,  Herefordshire,  Monmouthshire,  Gloucestershire,  Devon,  Dorset, 
Northamptonshire,  Huntingdonshire,  and  Bedfordshire  are  more  so — and  equal 
to  North  Wales  and  Leinster;  while  Buckinghamshire  and  Hertfordshire  exceed 
even  this  degree  and  are  on  a  level  with  South  Wales  and  Ulster.  Cornwall,  of 
course,  is  more  Keltic  than  any  other  English  county,  and  as  much  so  as  Argyll, 
Inverness-shire,  or  Connaught. "  ,  '  The  Study  of  Celtic  Literature. 


4  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

It  is  as  beautiful  and  graceful  as  the  Greek;  and, 
unlike  the  Greek,  which  is  the  reflection  of  a  clime 
and  soil  which  few  of  us  will  ever  see,  it  is  our  own. 
Divinities  should,  surely,  seem  the  inevitable  out- 
growth of  the  land  they  move  in!  How  strange 
Apollo  would  appear,  naked  among  icebergs,  or  fur- 
clad  Thor  striding  under  groves  of  palms!  But  the 
Celtic  gods  and  heroes  are  the  natural  inhabitants  of 
a  British  landscape,  not  seeming  foreign  and  out-of- 
place  in  a  scene  where  there  is  no  vine  or  olive,  but 
"shading  in  with"  our  homely  oak  and  bracken, 
gorse  and  heath. 

Thus  we  gain  an  altogether  fresh  interest  in  the 
beautiful  spots  of  our  own  islands,  especially  those 
of  the  wilder  and  more  mountainous  west,  where  the 
older  inhabitants  of  the  land  lingered  longest.  Saxon 
conquest  obliterated  much  in  Eastern  Britain,  and 
changed  more;  but  in  the  West  of  England,  in 
Wales,  in  Scotland,  and  especially  in  legend-haunted 
Ireland,  the  hills  and  dales  still  keep  memories  of 
the  ancient  gods  of  the  ancient  race.  Here  and 
there  in  South  Wales  and  the  West  of  England  are 
regions — once  mysterious  and  still  romantic — which 
the  British  Celts  held  to  be  the  homes  of  gods  or 
outposts  of  the  Other  World.  In  Ireland,  not  only 
is  there  scarcely  a  place  that  is  not  connected  in  some 
way  with  the  traditionary  exploits  of  the  "  Red 
Branch  Champions",  or  of  Finn  and  his  mighty  men, 
but  the  old  deities  are  still  remembered,  dwarfed 
into  fairies,  but  keeping  the  same  attributes  and  the 
same  names  as  of  yore.     Wordsworth's  complaint* 

^  In  a  sonnet  written  in  1801. 


Importance  of  Celtic  Mythology  5 

that,  while  Pelion  and  Ossa,  Olympus  and  Parnassus 
are  "  in  immortal  books  enrolled ",  not  one  Eng- 
lish mountain,  "though  round  our  sea-girt  shore 
they  rise  in  crowds ",  had  been  **  by  the  Celestial 
Muses  glorified"  doubtless  seemed  true  to  his  own 
generation.  Thanks  to  the  scholars  who  have  un- 
veiled the  ancient  Gaelic  and  British  mythologies, 
it  need  not  be  so  for  ours.  On  Ludgate  Hill,  as 
well  as  on  many  less  famous  eminences,  once  stood 
the  temple  of  the  British  Zeus.  A  mountain  not 
far  from  Bettws-y-Coed  was  the  British  Olympus, 
the  court  and  palace  of  our  ancient  gods. 

It  may  well  be  doubted,  however,  whether  Words- 
worth's contemporaries  would  have  welcomed  the 
mythology  which  was  their  own  by  right  of  birth 
as  a  substitute  for  that  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The 
inspiration  of  classic  culture,  which  Wordsworth  was 
one  of  the  first  to  break  with,  was  still  powerful. 
How  some  of  its  professors  would  have  held  their 
sides  and  roared  at  the  very  notion  of  a  British 
mythology!  Yet,  all  the  time,  it  had  long  been 
secretly  leavening  English  ideas  and  ideals,  none 
the  less  potently  because  disguised  under  forms 
which  could  be  readily  appreciated.  Popular  fancy 
had  rehabilitated  the  old  gods,  long  banned  by  the 
priests'  bell,  book,  and  candle,  under  various  dis- 
guises. They  still  lived  on  in  legend  as  kings  of 
ancient  Britain  reigning  in  a  fabulous  past  anterior 
to  Julius  Caesar — such  were  King  Lud,  founder  of 
London;  King  Lear,  whose  legend  was  immortalized 
by  Shakespeare;  King  Brennius,  who  conquered 
Rome;   as  well  as  many  others  who  will  be  found 


6  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

filling  parts  in  old  drama.  They  still  lived  on  as 
long-dead  saints  of  the  early  churches  of  Ireland 
and  Britain,  whose  wonderful  attributes  and  adven- 
tures are,  in  many  cases,  only  those  of  their  original 
namesakes,  the  old  gods,  told  afresh.  And  they  still 
lived  on  in  another,  and  a  yet  more  potent,  way. 
Myths  of  Arthur  and  his  cycle  of  gods  passed  into 
the  hands  of  the  Norman  story-tellers,  to  reappear 
as  romances  of  King  Arthur  and  his  Knights  of  the 
Table  Round.  Thus  spread  over  civilized  Europe, 
their  influence  was  immense.  Their  primal  poetic 
impulse  is  still  resonant  in  our  literature;  we  need 
only  instance  Tennyson  and  Swinburne  as  minds 
that  have  come  under  its  sway. 

This  diverse  influence  of  Celtic  mythology  upon 
English  poetry  and  romance  has  been  eloquently  set 
forth  by  Mr.  Elton  in  his  Origins  of  English  History. 
**  The  religion  of  the  British  tribes  ",  he  writes,  **  has 
exercised  an  important  influence  upon  literature. 
The  mediaeval  romances  and  the  legends  which 
stood  for  history  are  full  of  the  *  fair  humanities ' 
and  figures  of  its  bright  mythology.  The  elemental 
powers  of  earth  and  fire,  and  the  spirits  which 
haunted  the  waves  and  streams  appear  again  as 
kings  in  the  Irish  Annals,  or  as  saints  and  hermits 
in  Wales.  The  Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  Sir 
Kay  and  Tristrem  and  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere,  betray 
their  mighty  origin  by  the  attributes  they  retained 
as  heroes  of  romance.  It  was  a  goddess,  ^  Dea 
quaedam  phantastica\  who  bore  the  wounded  Arthur 
to  the  peaceful  valley.  *  There  was  little  sunlight 
on  its  woods  and  streams,  and  the  nights  were  dark 


Importance  of  Celtic  Mythology  7 

and  gloomy  for  want  of  the  moon  and  stars.'  This 
is  the  country  of  Oberon  and  of  Sir  Huon  of  Bor- 
deaux. It  is  the  dreamy  forest  of  Arden.  In  an 
older  mythology,  it  was  the  realm  of  a  King  of 
Shadows,  the  country  of  Gwyn  ap  Nudd,  who  rode 
as  Sir  Guyon  in  the  *  Fairie  Queene ' — 

*  And  knighthood  took  of  good  Sir  Huon's  hand. 
When  with  King  Oberon  he  came  to  Fairyland'."^ 

To  trace  Welsh  and  Irish  kings  and  saints  and 
hermits  back  to  **the  elemental  powers  of  earth 
and  fire,  and  the  spirits  that  haunted  the  woods 
and  streams  "  of  Celtic  imagination,  and  to  disclose 
primitive  pagan  deities  under  the  mediaeval  and 
Christian  trappings  of  **King  Arthur's  Knights"  will 
necessarily  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  volume. 
But  meanwhile  the  reader  will  probably  be  asking 
what  evidence  there  is  that  apocryphal  British  kings 
like  Lear  and  Lud,  and  questionable  Irish  saints 
like  Bridget  are  really  disguised  Celtic  divinities,  or 
that  the  Morte  D'Arthur,  with  its  love  of  Launcelot 
and  the  queen,  and  its  quest  of  the  Holy  Grail,  was 
ever  anything  more  than  an  invention  of  the  Norman 
romance- writers.  He  will  demand  to  know  what 
facts  we  really  possess  about  this  supposed  Celtic 
mythology  alleged  to  have  furnished  their  prototypes, 
and  of  what  real  antiquity  and  value  are  our  authori- 
ties upon  it. 

The  answer  to  his  question  will  be  found  in  the 
next  chapter. 

^  Elton:  Origins  of  English  History,  chap.  X. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE   SOURCES    OF   OUR    KNOWLEDGE   OF    THE 
CELTIC    MYTHOLOGY 

We  may  begin  by  asserting  with  confidence  that 
Mr.  Elton  has  touched  upon  a  part  only  of  the 
material  on  which  we  may  draw,  to  reconstruct 
the  ancient  British  mythology.  Luckily,  we  are 
not  wholly  dependent  upon  the  difficult  tasks  of 
resolving  the  fabled  deeds  of  apocryphal  Irish  and 
British  kings  who  reigned  earlier  than  St.  Patrick 
or  before  Julius  Caesar  into  their  original  form  of 
Celtic  myths,  of  sifting  the  attributes  and  miracles 
of  doubtfully  historical  saints,  or  of  separating  the 
primitive  pagan  elements  in  the  legends  of  Arthur 
and  his  Knights  from  the  embellishments  added  by 
the  romance-writers.  We  have,  in  addition  to  these 
— which  we  may  for  the  present  put  upon  one  side  as 
secondary — sources,  a  mass  of  genuine  early  writings 
which,  though  post-Christian  in  the  form  in  which 
they  now  exist,  none  the  less  descend  from  the  pre- 
ceding pagan  age.  These  are  contained  in  vellum 
and  parchment  manuscripts  long  preserved  from 
destruction  in  mansions  and  monasteries  in  Ireland, 
Scotland,  and  Wales,  and  only  during  the  last  cen- 
tury brought  to  light,  copied,  and  translated  by  the 
patient  labours  of  scholars  who  have  grappled  with 


Sources  of  our  Knowledge  9 

the  long-obsolete  dialects  in  which  they  were  trans- 
scribed. 

Many  of  these  volumes  are  curious  miscellanies. 
Usually  the  one  book  of  a  great  house  or  monastic 
community,  everything  was  copied  into  it  that  the 
scholar  of  the  family  or  brotherhood  thought  to  be 
best  worth  preserving.  Hence  they  contain  matter 
of  the  most  diverse  kind.  There  are  translations  of 
portions  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  classics,  and  of  such 
then  popular  books  as  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  and 
Nennius'  Histories  of  Britain;  lives  of  famous  saints, 
together  with  works  attributed  to  them ;  poems  and 
romances  of  which,  under  a  thin  disguise,  the  old 
Gaelic  and  British  gods  are  the  heroes;  together 
with  treatises  on  all  the  subjects  then  studied — 
grammar,  prosody,  law,  history,  geography,  chron- 
ology, and  the  genealogies  of  important  chiefs. 

The  majority  of  these  documents  were  put  together 
during  a  period  which,  roughly  speaking,  lasted  from 
the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  to  the  end  of 
the  sixteenth.  In  Ireland,  in  Wales,  and,  appa- 
rently, also  in  Scotland,  it  was  a  time  of  literary 
revival  after  the  turmoils  of  the  previous  epoch.  In 
Ireland,  the  Norsemen,  after  long  ravaging,  had 
settled  peacefully  down,  while  in  Wales,  the  Nor- 
man Conquest  had  rendered  the  country  for  the  first 
time  comparatively  quiet.  The  scattered  remains  of 
history,  lay  and  ecclesiastical,  of  science,  and  of 
legend  were  gathered  together. 

Of  the  Irish  manuscripts,  the  earliest,  and,  for  our 
purposes,  the  most  important,  on  account  of  the 
great  store  of  ancient  Gaelic  mythology  which,  in 


lo  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

spite  of  its  dilapidated  condition,  it  still  contains,  is 
in  the  possession  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy.  Un- 
luckily, it  is  reduced  to  a  fragment  of  one  hundred 
and  thirty-eight  pages,  but  this  remnant  preserves  a 
large  number  of  romances  relating  to  the  old  gods 
and  heroes  of  Ireland.  Among  other  things,  it  con- 
tains a  complete  account  of  the  epical  saga  called 
the  Tdin  B6  Chuailgni,  the  **  Raiding  of  the  Cattle 
of  Cooley  ",  in  which  the  hero,  Cuchulainn,  performed 
his  greatest  feats.  This  manuscript  is  called  the  Book 
of  the  Dun  Cow,  from  the  tradition  that  it  was  copied 
from  an  earlier  book  written  upon  the  skin  of  a 
favourite  animal  belonging  to  Saint  Ciaran,  who 
lived  in  the  seventh  century.  An  entry  upon  one 
of  its  pages  reveals  the  name  of  its  scribe,  one  Mael- 
muiri,  whom  we  know  to  have  been  killed  by  robbers 
in  the  church  of  Clonmacnois  in  the  year  1106. 

Far  more  voluminous,  and  but  little  less  ancient, 
is  the  Book  of  Leinster,  said  to  have  been  compiled 
in  the  early  part  of  the  twelfth  century  by  Finn  mac 
Gorman,  Bishop  of  Kildare.  This  also  contains  an 
account  of  Cuchulainn  s  mighty  deeds  which  supple- 
ments the  older  version  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow. 
Of  somewhat  less  importance  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  student  of  Gaelic  mythology  come  the  Book 
of  Ballymote  and  the  Yellow  Book  of  Lecan,  belong- 
ing to  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  the 
Books  of  Lecan  and  of  Lismore,  both  attributed  to 
the  fifteenth.  Besides  these  six  great  collections, 
there  survive  many  other  manuscripts  which  also 
contain  ancient  mythical  lore.  In  one  of  these, 
dating  from  the  fifteenth  century,  is  to  be  found  the 


Sources  of  our  Knowledge  1 1 

story  of  the  Battle  of  Moytura,  fought  between  the 
gods  of  Ireland  and  their  enemies,  the  Fomors,  or 
demons  of  the  deep  sea. 

The  Scottish  manuscripts,  preserved  in  the  Advo- 
cates* Library  at  Edinburgh,  date  back  in  some  cases 
as  far  as  the  fourteenth  century,  though  the  majority 
of  them  belong  to  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth.  They 
corroborate  the  Irish  documents,  add  to  the  Cuchu- 
lainn  saga,  and  make  a  more  special  subject  of  the 
other  heroic  cycle,  that  which  relates  the  not  less 
wonderful  deeds  of  Finn,  Ossian,  and  the  Fenians. 
They  also  contain  stories  of  other  characters,  who, 
more  ancient  than  either  Finn  or  Cuchulainn,  are 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  the  god-tribe  of  the  ancient 
Gaels. 

The  Welsh  documents  cover  about  the  same 
period  as  the  Irish  and  the  Scottish.  Four  of  these 
stand  out  from  the  rest,  as  most  important.  The 
oldest  is  the  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen,  which 
dates  from  the  third  quarter  of  the  twelfth  cen- 
tury; the  Book  of  Aneurin,  which  was  written  late 
in  the  thirteenth;  the  Book  of  Taliesin,  assigned 
to  the  fourteenth;  and  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest, 
compiled  by  various  persons  during  that  century  and 
the  one  following  it.  The  first  three  of  these  **  Four 
Ancient  Books  of  Wales"  are  small  in  size,  and  con- 
tain poems  attributed  to  the  great  traditional  bards 
of  the  sixth  century,  Myrddin,  Taliesin,  and  Aneurin. 
The  last — the  Red  Book  of  Hergest — is  far  larger. 
In  it  are  to  be  found  Welsh  translations  of  the  British 
Chronicles;  the  oft-mentioned  Triads,  verses  cele- 
brating    famous    traditionary    persons    or    things; 


12  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

ancient  poems  attributed  to  Llywarch  Hen;  and, 
of  priceless  value  to  any  study  of  our  subject,  the 
so-called  Mabinogion,  stories  in  which  large  portions 
of  the  old  British  mythology  are  worked  up  into 
romantic  form. 

The  whole  bulk,  therefore,  of  the  native  literature 
bearing  upon  the  mythology  of  the  British  Islands 
may  be  attributed  to  a  period  which  lasted  from  the 
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  to  the  end  of  the 
sixteenth.  But  even  the  commencement  of  this  era 
will  no  doubt  seem  far  too  late  a  day  to  allow 
authenticity  to  matter  which  ought  to  have  vastly 
preceded  it.  The  date,  however,  merely  marks  the 
final  redaction  of  the  contents  of  the  manuscripts 
into  the  form  in  which  they  now  exist,  without 
bearing  at  all  upon  the  time  of  their  authorship. 
Avowedly  copies  of  ancient  poems  and  tales  from 
much  older  manuscripts,  the  present  books  no  more 
fix  the  period  of  the  original  composition  of  their 
contents  than  the  presence  of  a  portion  of  the  Canter- 
bury Tales  in  a  modern  anthology  of  English  poetry 
would  assign  Chaucer  to  the  present  year  of  grace. 

This  may  be  proved  both  directly  and  inferentially.^ 
In  some  instances — as  in  that  of  an  elegy  upon  Saint 
Columba  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow — the  dates  of 
authorship  are  actually  given.  In  others,  we  may 
depend  upon  evidence  which,  if  not  quite  so  absolute, 
is  nearly  as  convincing.  Even  where  the  writer 
does  not  state  that  he  is  copying  from  older  manu- 


^  Satisfactory  summaries  of  the  evidence  for  the  dates  of  both  the  Gaelic  and 
Welsh  legendary  material  will  be  found  in  pamphlets  No.  8  and  ii  of  Mr.  Nutt's 
Popular  Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore. 


Sources  of  our  Knowledge  13 

scripts,  it  is  obvious  that  this  must  have  been  the 
case,  from  the  glosses  in  his  version.  The  scribes 
of  the  earlier  Gaelic  manuscripts  very  often  found,  in 
the  documents  from  which  they  themselves  were 
copying,  words  so  archaic  as  to  be  unintelligible  to 
the  readers  of  their  own  period.  To  render  them 
comprehensible,  they  were  obliged  to  insert  marginal 
notes  which  explained  these  obsolete  words  by 
reference  to  other  manuscripts  more  ancient  still. 
Often  the  mediaeval  copyists  have  ignorantly  moved 
these  notes  from  the  margin  into  the  text,  where  they 
remain,  like  philological  fossils,  to  give  evidence  of 
previous  forms  of  life.  The  documents  from  which 
they  were  taken  have  perished,  leaving  the  mediaeval 
copies  as  their  sole  record.  In  the  Welsh  Mabin- 
ogion  the  same  process  is  apparent.  Peculiarities 
in  the  existing  manuscripts  show  plainly  enough 
that  they  must  have  been  copied  from  some  more 
archaic  text.  Besides  this,  they  are,  as  they  at 
present  stand,  obviously  made  up  of  earlier  tales 
pieced  together.  Almost  as  clearly  as  the  Gaelic 
manuscripts,  the  Welsh  point  us  back  to  older  and 
more  primitive  forms. 

The  ancient  legends  of  the  Gael  and  the  Briton 
are  thus  shown  to  have  been  no  mere  inventions  of 
scholarly  monks  in  the  Middle  Ages.  We  have  now 
to  trace,  if  possible,  the  date,  not  necessarily  of  their 
first  appearance  on  men  s  lips,  but  of  their  first  redac- 
tion into  writing  in  approximately  the  form  in  which 
we  have  them  now. 

Circumstantial  evidence  can  be  adduced  to  prove 
that  the  most   important   portions  both  of  Gaelic 


14  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

and  British  early  literature  can  be  safely  relegated 
to  a  period  of  several  centuries  prior  to  their  now- 
existing  record.  Our  earliest  version  of  the  episode 
of  the  Tdin  B6  ChuailgnS,  which  is  the  nucleus  and 
centre  of  the  ancient  Gaelic  heroic  cycle  of  which 
Cuchulainn,  fortissimus  heros  Scotorum,  is  the  prin- 
cipal figure,  is  found  in  the  twelfth-century  Book  of 
the  Dun  Cow.  But  legend  tells  us  that  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  seventh  century  the  Saga  had  not 
only  been  composed,  but  had  actually  become  so 
obsolete  as  to  have  been  forgotten  by  the  bards. 
Their  leader,  one  Senchan  Torpeist,  a  historical 
character,  and  chief  bard  of  Ireland  at  that  time, 
obtained  permission  from  the  Saints  to  call  Fergus, 
Cuchulainn  s  contemporary,  and  a  chief  actor  in  the 
**  Raid",  from  the  dead,  and  received  from  the  resur- 
rected hero  a  true  and  full  version.  This  tradition, 
dealing  with  a  real  personage,  surely  shows  that  the 
story  of  the  Tdin  was  known  before  the  time  of 
Senchan,  and  probably  preserves  the  fact,  either 
that  his  version  of  Cuchulainn's  famous  deeds 
became  the  accepted  one,  or  that  he  was  the  first 
to  reduce  it  to  writing.  An  equally  suggestive  con- 
sideration approximately  fixes  for  us  the  earliest 
redaction  of  the  Welsh  mythological  prose  tales 
called  the  '' Mabinogion",  or,  more  correctly  speak- 
ing, the  **  Four  Branches  of  the  Mabinogi  ".^  In 
none  of  these  is  there  the  slightest  mention,  or 
apparently  the  least  knowledge,  of  Arthur,  around 
whom  and  whose  supposed  contemporaries  centres 
the  mass  of  British  legend  as  it  was  transmitted  by 

^  Rhys:  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend^  chap.  I. 


Sources  of  our  Knowledge  15 

the  Welsh  to  the  Normans.  These  mysterious 
mythological  records  must  in  all  probability,  there- 
fore, antedate  the  Arthurian  cycle  of  myth,  which 
was  already  being  put  into  form  in  the  sixth  cen- 
tury. On  the  other  hand,  the  characters  of  the 
'*  Four  Branches"  are  mentioned  without  comment 
— as  though  they  were  personages  with  whom  no 
one  could  fail  to  be  familiar — in  the  supposed  sixth- 
century  poems  contained  in  those  **  Four  Ancient 
Books  of  Wales "  in  which  are  found  the  first 
meagre  references  to  the  British  hero. 

Such  considerations  as  these  throw  back,  with 
reasonable  certainty,  the  existence  of  the  Irish  and 
Welsh  poems  and  prose  tales,  in  something  like 
their  present  shape,  to  a  period  antedating  the 
seventh  century. 

But  this,  again,  means  only  that  the  myths,  tradi- 
tions, and  legends  were  current  at  that  to  us  early, 
but  to  them,  in  their  actual  substance,  late  date,  in 
literary  form.  A  mythology  must  always  be  far 
older  than  the  oldest  verses  and  stories  that  cele- 
brate it.  Elaborate  poems  and  sagas  are  not  made 
in  a  day,  or  in  a  year.  The  legends  of  the  Gaelic 
and  British  gods  and  heroes  could  not  have  sprung, 
like  Athena  fiom  the  head  of  Zeus,  full-born  out  of 
some  poet's  brain.  The  bard  who  first  put  them 
into  artistic  shape  was  setting  down  the  primitive 
traditions  of  his  race.  We  may  therefore  venture 
to  describe  them  as  not  of  the  twelfth  century  or 
of  the  seventh,  but  as  of  a  prehistoric  and  imme- 
morial antiquity. 

Internal  evidence  bears  this  out    An  examination 


1 6  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

of  both  the  Gaelic  and  British  legendary  romances 
shows,  under  embellishing  details  added  by  later 
hands,  an  inner  core  of  primeval  thought  which 
brings  them  into  line  with  the  similar  ideas  of  other 
races  in  the  earliest  stage  of  culture.  Their  **  local 
colour  "  may  be  that  of  their  last  **  editor  ",  but  their 
'*  plots  "  are  pre-mediseval,  pre-Christian,  pre-historic. 
The  characters  of  early  Gaelic  legend  belong  to  the 
same  stamp  of  imagination  that  created  Olympian 
and  Titan,  ^sir  and  Jotun.  We  must  go  far  to 
the  back  of  civilized  thought  to  find  parallels  to  such 
a  story  as  that  in  which  the  British  sun-god,  struck 
by  a  rival  in  love  with  a  poisoned  spear,  is  turned 
into  an  eagle,  from  whose  wound  great  pieces  of 
carrion  are  continually  falling.^ 

This  aspect  of  the  Celtic  literary  records  was 
clearly  seen,  and  eloquently  expressed,  by  Matthew 
Arnold  in  his  Study  of  Celtic  Literature}  He  was 
referring  to  the  Welsh  side,  but  his  image  holds 
good  equally  for  the  Gaelic.  **  The  first  thing  that 
strikes  one  ",  he  says,  "  in  reading  the  Mabinogion  is 
how  evidently  the  mediaeval  story-teller  is  pillaging 
an  antiquity  of  which  he  does  not  fully  possess  the 
secret:  he  is  like  a  peasant  building  his  hut  on  the 
site  of  Halicarnassus  or  Ephesus;  he  builds,  but 
what  he  builds  is  full  of  materials  of  which  he  knows 
not  the  history,  or  knows  by  a  glimmering  tradition 
merely :  stones  *  not  of  this  building ',  but  of  an  older 
architecture,  greater,  cunninger,  more  majestical." 
His  heroes  **are  no  mediaeval  personages:  they  be- 
long to  an  older,  pagan,  mythological  world  ".     So, 

1 3ee  chap,  xvi  of  this  book—"  The  Gods  of  the  Britons  ".  '  Lecture  II. 


Sources  of  our  Knowledge  17 

too,  with  the  figures,  however  euhemerized,  of  the 
three  great  Gaelic  cycles:  that  of  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann,  of  the  Heroes  of  Ulster,  of  Finn  and  the 
Fenians.  Their  divinity  outshines  their  humanity; 
through  their  masks  may  be  seen  the  faces  of  gods. 
Yet,  gods  as  they  are,  they  had  taken  on  the 
semblance  of  mortality  by  the  time  their  histories 
were  fixed  in  the  form  in  which  we  have  them  now. 
Their  earliest  records,  if  those  could  be  restored  to 
us,  would  doubtless  show  them  eternal  and  undying, 
changing  their  shapes  at  will,  but  not  passing  away. 
But  the  post-Christian  copyists,  whether  Irish  or 
Welsh,  would  not  countenance  this.  Hence  we 
have  the  singular  paradox  of  the  deaths  of  Im- 
mortals. There  is  hardly  one  of  the  figures  of 
either  the  Gaelic  or  the  British  Pantheon  whose 
demise  is  not  somewhere  recorded.  Usually  they 
fell  in  the  unceasing  battles  between  the  divinities 
of  darkness  and  of  light.  Their  deaths  in  earlier 
cycles  of  myth,  however,  do  not  preclude  their  ap- 
pearance in  later  ones.  Only,  indeed,  with  the 
closing  of  the  lips  of  the  last  mortal  who  preserved 
his  tradition  can  the  life  of  a  god  be  truly  said  to 
end. 


(B219)  B 


CHAPTER   III 

WHO    WERE    THE    **  ANCIENT    BRITONS  "? 

But,  before  proceeding  to  recount  the  myths  of 
the  '*  Ancient  Britons",  it  will  be  well  to  decide 
what  people,  exactly,  we  mean  by  that  loose  but 
convenient  phrase.  We  have,  all  of  us,  vague  ideas 
of  Ancient  Britons,  recollected,  doubtless,  from  our 
school  -  books.  There  we  saw  their  pictures  as, 
painted  with  woad,  they  paddled  coracles,  or  drove 
scythed  chariots  through  legions  of  astonished 
Romans.  Their  Druids,  white-bearded  and  wear- 
ing long,  white  robes,  cut  the  mistletoe  with  a  golden 
sickle  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  or,  less  innocently 
employed,  made  bonfires  of  human  beings  shut  up 
in  gigantic  figures  of  wicker-work. 

Such  picturesque  details  were  little  short  of  the 
sum-total,  not  only  of  our  own  knowledge  of  the 
subject,  but  also  of  that  of  our  teachers.  Practically 
all  their  information  concerning  the  ancient  inhabit- 
ants of  Britain  was  taken  from  the  Commentaries  of 
Julius  Caesar.  So  far  as  it  went,  it  was  no  doubt 
correct;  but  it  did  not  go  far.  Caesar's  interest  in 
our  British  ancestors  was  that  of  a  general  who  was 
his  own  war-correspondent  rather  than  that  of  an 
exhaustive  and  painstaking  scientist.  It  has  been 
reserved  for  modern  archaeologists,  philologists,  and 

18 


IVko  were  the  ^^ Ancient  Britons'' ?         19 

ethnologists    to   give   us   a    fuller   account   of    the 
Ancient  Britons. 

The  inhabitants  of  our  islands  previous  to  the 
Roman  invasion  are  generally  described  as  *'  Celts  ". 
But  they  must  have  been  largely  a  mixed  race;  and 
the  people  with  whom  they  mingled  must  have  modi- 
fied to  some — and  perhaps  to  a  large — extent  their 
physique,  their  customs,  and  their  language. 

Speculation  has  run  somewhat  wild  over  the 
question  of  the  composition  of  the  Early  Britons. 
But  out  of  the  clash  of  rival  theories  there  emerges 
one — and  one  only — which  may  be  considered  as 
scientifically  established.  We  have  certain  proof  of 
two  distinct  human  stocks  in  the  British  Islands  at 
the  time  of  the  Roman  Conquest;  and  so  great  an 
authority  as  Professor  Huxley  has  given  his  opinion 
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  others.^ 

The  earliest  of  these  two  races  would  seem  to 
have  inhabited  our  islands  from  the  most  ancient 
times,  and  may,  for  our  purpose,  be  described  as 
aboriginal.  It  was  the  people  that  built  the  ''long 
barrows  " ;  and  which  is  variously  called  by  ethnolo- 
gists the  Iberian,  Mediterranean,  Berber,  Basque, 
Silurian,  or  Euskarian  race.  In  physique  it  was 
short,  swarthy,  dark-haired,  dark-eyed,  and  long- 
skulled;  its  language  belonged  to  the  class  called 
"  Hamitic  ",  the  surviving  types  of  which  are  found 
among  the  Gallas,  Abyssinians,  Berbers,  and  other 
North  African  tribes;  and  it  seems  to  have  come 
originally  from  some  part  either  of  Eastern,  North- 
ern, or  Central   Africa.      Spreading  thence,  it  was 

*  Huxley:  On  Some  Fixed  Points  in  British  Ethnology.     1871. 


20  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

probably  the  first  people  to  inhabit  the  Valley  ol 
the  Nile,  and  it  sent  offshoots  into  Syria  and  Asia 
Minor.  The  earliest  Hellenes  found  it  in  Greece 
under  the  name  of  *'Pelasgoi";  the  earliest  Latins 
in  Italy,  as  the  "Etruscans";  and  the  Hebrews  in 
Palestine,  as  the  **Hittites".  It  spread  northward 
through  Europe  as  far  as  the  Baltic,  and  westward, 
along  the  Atlas  chain,  to  Spain,  France,  and  our 
own  islands.^  In  many  countries  it  reached  a  com- 
paratively high  level  of  civilization,  but  in  Britain 
its  development  must  have  been  early  checked.  We 
can  discern  it  as  an  agricultural  rather  than  a 
pastoral  people,  still  in  the  Stone  Age,  dwelling 
in  totemistic  tribes  on  hills  whose  summits  it  forti- 
fied elaborately,  and  whose  slopes  it  cultivated  on 
what  is  called  the  *'  terrace  system  ",  and  having  a 
primitive  culture  which  ethnologists  think  to  have 
much  resembled  that  of  the  present  hill  -  tribes 
of  Southern  India.^  It  held  our  islands  till  the 
coming  of  the  Celts,  who  fought  with  the  aborigines, 
dispossessed  them  of  the  more  fertile  parts,  subju- 
gated them,  even  amalgamated  with  them,  but 
certainly  never  extirpated  them.  In  the  time  of  the 
Romans  they  were  still  practically  independent  in 
South  Wales.  In  Ireland  they  were  long  uncon- 
quered,  and  are  found  as  allies  rather  than  serfs  of 
the  Gaels,  ruling  their  own  provinces,  and  preserving 
their  own  customs  and  religion.  Nor,  in  spite  of  all 
the  successive  invasions  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 


*  Sergi :    The  Mediterranean  Race. 

^Gomme:   The  Village  Community.     Chap.  IV — "The  non-Aryan  Elements  in 
the  EngUsh  Village  Community". 


Wko  were  the  ^^  Ancient  Britons''?        21 

are  they  yet  extinct,  or  so  merged  as  to  have  lost 
their  type,  which  is  still  the  predominant  one  in 
many  parts  of  the  west  both  of  Britain  and  Ireland, 
and  is  believed  by  some  ethnologists  to  be  generally 
upon  the  increase  all  over  England. 

The  second  of  the  two  races  w^as  the  exact  oppo- 
site to  the  first.  It  was  the  tall,  fair,  light-haired, 
blue-  or  gray -eyed,  broad -headed  people  called, 
popularly,  the  **  Celts ",  who  belonged  in  speech 
to  the  ''Aryan"  family,  their  language  finding  its 
affinities  in  Latin,  Greek,  Teutonic,  Slavic,  the 
Zend  of  Ancient  Persia,  and  the  Sanscrit  of  Ancient 
India.  Its  original  home  was  probably  somewhere 
in  Central  Europe,  along  the  course  of  the  upper 
Danube,  or  in  the  region  of  the  Alps.  The  ''round 
barrows  "  in  which  it  buried  its  dead,  or  deposited 
their  burnt  ashes,  differ  in  shape  from  the  "long 
barrows"  of  the  earlier  race.  It  was  in  a  higher 
stage  of  culture  than  the  "  Iberians ",  and  intro- 
duced into  Britain  bronze  and  silver,  and,  perhaps, 
some  of  the  more  lately  domesticated  animals. 

Both  Iberians  and  Celts  were  divided  into  numer- 
ous tribes,  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  there 
was  any  great  diversity  among  the  former.  It  is 
otherwise  with  the  Celts,  who  were  separated  into 
two  main  branches  which  came  over  at  different 
times.  The  earliest  were  the  Goidels,  or  Gaels;  the 
second,  the  Brythons,  or  Britons.  Between  these 
two  branches  there  was  not  only  a  dialectical,  but 
probably,  also,  a  considerable  physical  difference. 
Some  anthropologists  even  postulate  a  different 
shape  of  skull.     Without  necessarily  admitting  this, 


22  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

there  is  reason  to  suppose  a  difference  of  build  and 
of  colour  of  hair.  With  regard  to  this,  we  have  the 
evidence  of  Latin  writers — of  Tacitus/  who  tells  us 
that  the  ''  Caledonians  "  of  the  North  differed  from 
the  Southern  Britons  in  being  larger-limbed  and 
redder-haired,  and  of  Strabo,^  who  described  the 
tribes  in  the  interior  of  Britain  as  taller  than  the 
Gaulish  colonists  on  the  coast,  with  hair  less  yellow 
and  limbs  more  loosely  knit.  Equally  do  the  classic 
authorities  agree  in  recognizing  the  "  Silures "  of 
South  Wales  as  an  entirely  different  race  from  any 
other  in  Britain.  The  dark  complexions  and  curly 
hair  of  these  Iberians  seemed  to  Tacitus  to  prove 
them  immigrants  from  Spain. ^ 

Professor  Rhys  also  puts  forward  evidence  to 
show  that  the  Goidels  and  the  Brythons  had  already 
separated  before  they  first  left  Gaul  for  our  islands.* 
He  finds  them  as  two  distinct  peoples  there.  We 
do  not  expect  so  much  nowadays  from  ''the  merest 
school-boy  "  as  we  did  in  Macaulay's  time,  but  even 
the  modern  descendant  of  that  paragon  could  pro- 
bably tell  us  that  all  Gaul  was  divided  into  three 
parts,  one  of  which  was  inhabited  by  the  Belgae, 
another  by  the  Aquitani,  and  the  third  by  those 
who  called  themselves  Celtae,  but  were  termed 
Gain  by  the  Romans;  and  that  they  all  differed 
from  one  another  in  language,  customs,  and  laws.^ 
Of  these,  Professor  Rhys  identifies  the  Belgae  with 
the  Brythons,  and  the  Celtae  with  the  Goidels,  the 

^  Tacitus :  Agricola,  chap.  Xi.  *  Strabo ;  Geographica,  Book  IV,  chap.  V. 

3  Tacitus,  op.  cit. 

*  Rhys :   The  Early  Ethnology  of  the  British  Islands.     Scottish  Review.    April, 
1890.  °  Caesar:  De  Bello  Gallico,  Book  I,  chap.  i. 


IVko  were  the  ^^  Ancient  Britons  ^^  ?         23 

third  people,  the  Aquitani,  being  non-Celtic  and 
non- Aryan,  part  of  the  great  H  am itic  -  speaking 
Iberian  stock.^  The  Celtae,  with  their  Goidelic 
dialect  of  Celtic,  which  survives  to-day  in  the  Gaelic 
languages  of  Ireland,  Scotland,  and  the  Isle  of  Man, 
were  the  first  to  come  over  to  Britain,  pushed  for- 
ward, probably,  by  the  Belgae,  who,  Caesar  tells  us, 
were  the  bravest  of  the  Gauls.^  Here  they  con- 
quered the  native  Iberians,  driving  them  out  of  the 
fertile  parts  into  the  rugged  districts  of  the  north 
and  west.  Later  came  the  Belgae  themselves, 
compelled  by  press  of  population;  and  they,  bring- 
ing better  weapons  and  a  higher  civilization,  treated 
the  Goidels  as  those  had  treated  the  Iberians. 
Thus  harried,  the  Goidels  probably  combined  with 
the  Iberians  against  what  was  now  the  common  foe, 
and  became  to  a  large  degree  amalgamated  with 
them.  The  result  was  that  during  the  Roman 
domination  the  British  Islands  were  roughly  divided 
with  regard  to  race  as  follows:  The  Brythons,  or 
second  Celtic  race,  held  all  Britain  south  of  the 
Tweed,  with  the  exception  of  the  extreme  west, 
while  the  first  Celtic  race,  the  Goidelic,  had  most 
of  Ireland,  as  well  as  the  Isle  of  Man,  Cumberland, 
the  West  Highlands,  Cornwall,  Devon,  and  North 
Wales.  North  of  the  Grampians  lived  the  Picts, 
who  were  probably  more  or  less  Goidelicized  I  be 
rians,  the  aboriginal  race  also  holding  out,  unmixeo, 
in  South  Wales  and  parts  of  Ireland. 

It  is  now  time  to  decide  what,  for  the  purposes 
of  this  book,  it  will  be  best  to  call  the  two  different 

*  Rhys :  Scottish  Review.     April,  1890.  2  Qp.  Caesar,  op.  cit. 


24  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

branches  of  the  Celts,  and  their  languages.  With 
such  familiar  terms  as  ''  Gael "  and  "  Briton ", 
'*  Gaelic "  and  '*  British ",  ready  to  our  hands,  it 
seems  pedantic  to  insist  upon  the  more  technical 
''Goidel"  and  ^' Brython  ",  '*  Goidelic  "  and  '' Bry- 
thonic  ".  The  difficulty  is  that  the  words  ''Gael" 
and  *'  Gaelic  "  have  been  so  long  popularly  used  to 
designate  only  the  modern  '*  Goidels  "  of  Scotland 
and  their  language,  that  they  may  create  confusion 
when  also  applied  to  the  people  and  languages  of 
Ireland  and  the  Isle  of  Man.  Similarly,  the  words 
**  Briton  "  and  ''  British  "  have  come  to  mean,  at  the 
present  day,  the  people  of  the  whole  of  the  British 
Islands,  though  they  at  first  only  signified  the  in- 
habitants of  England,  Central  Wales,  the  Lowlands 
of  Scotland,  and  the  Brythonic  colony  in  Brittany. 
However,  the  words  *'Goidel"  and  '*  Brython ", 
with  their  derivatives,  are  so  clumsy  that  it  will 
probably  prove  best  to  use  the  neater  terms.  In 
this  volume,  therefore,  the  ''Goidels"  of  Ireland, 
Scotland,  and  the  Isle  of  Man  are  our  "  Gaels  "  and 
the  "Brythons"  of  England  and  Wales  are  our 
"Britons". 

We  get  the  earliest  accounts  of  the  life  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  British  Islands  from  two  sources. 
The  first  is  a  foreign  one,  that  of  the  Latin  writers. 
But  the  Romans  only  really  knew  the  Southern 
Britons,  whom  they  describe  as  similar  in  physique 
and  customs  to  the  Continental  Gauls,  with  whom, 
indeed,  they  considered  them  to  be  identical.^  At 
the  time  they  wrote,  colonies  of  Belgae  were  still 

*  Tacitus :  Agricola,  chap.  XI. 


IVko  were  the  ^^  Ancient  Britons''  ?        25 

settling  upon  the  coasts  of  Britain  opposite  to  Gaul.^ 
Roman  information  grew  scantier  as  it  approached 
the  Wall,  and  of  the  Northern  tribes  they  seem  to 
have  had  only  such  knowledge  as  they  gathered 
through  occasional  warfare  with  them.  They  describe 
them  as  entirely  barbarous,  naked  and  tattooed, 
living  by  the  chase  alone,  without  towns,  houses, 
or  fields,  without  government  or  family  life,  and  re- 
garding iron  as  an  ornament  of  value,  as  other,  more 
civilized  peoples  regarded  gold.^  As  for  Ireland, 
it  never  came  under  their  direct  observation,  and  we 
are  entirely  dependent  upon  its  native  writers  for 
information  as  to  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
Gaels.  It  may  be  considered  convincing  proof  of 
the  authenticity  of  the  descriptions  of  life  contained 
in  the  ancient  Gaelic  manuscripts  that  they  corrobo- 
rate so  completely  the  observations  of  the  Latin 
writers  upon  the  Britons  and  Gauls.  Reading  the 
two  side  by  side,  we  may  largely  reconstruct  the 
common  civilization  of  the  Celts. 

Roughly  speaking,  one  may  compare  it  with  the 
civilization  of  the  Greeks,  as  described  by  Homer.^ 
Both  peoples  were  in  the  tribal  and  pastoral  stage 
of  culture,  in  which  the  chiefs  are  the  great  cattle- 
owners  round  whom  their  less  wealthy  fellows  gather. 
Both  wear  much  the  same  attire,  use  the  same  kind 
of  weapons,  and  fight  in  the  same  manner — from 
the  war-chariot,  a  vehicle  already  obsolete  even  in 
Ireland   by  the  first  century  of  the   Christian   era. 

*  Caesar :  De  Bellico  Gallico,  Book  V,  chap.  xii. 

2  Elton:  Origins  of  English  History,  chap.  VI  i. 

3  See  "  La  Civilisation  des  Celtes et  celle  de  V Epopie  Homirique" ,  by  M.  d'Arbois 
de  Jubainville,  Cours  de  Littirature  Celtique,  Vol.  VI, 


26  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Battles  are  fought  single-handed  between  chiefs,  the 
ill-armed  common  people  contributing  little  to  their 
result,  and  less  to  their  history.  Such  chiefs  are 
said  to  be  divinely  descended — sons,  even,  of  the. 
immortal  gods.  Their  tremendous  feats  are  sung 
by  the  bards,  who,  like  the  Homeric  poets,  were 
privileged  persons,  inferior  only  to  the  war  -  lord. 
Ancient  Greek  and  Ancient  Celt  had  very  much  the 
same  conceptions  of  life,  both  as  regards  this  world 
and  the  next. 

We  may  gather  much  detailed  information  of  the 
early  inhabitants  of  the  British  Islands  from  our 
various  authorities.^  Their  clothes,  which  consisted,  * 
according  to  the  Latin  writers,  of  a  blouse  with 
sleeves,  trousers  fitting  closely  round  the  ankles,  " 
and  a  shawl  or  cloak,  fastened  at  the  shoulder  with 
a  brooch,  were  made  either  of  thick  felt  or  of 
woven  cloth  dyed  with  various  brilliant  colours. 
The  writer  Diodorus  tells  us  that  they  were  crossed 
with  little  squares  and  lines,  *'as  though  they  had 
been  sprinkled  with  flowers  ".  They  were,  in  fact, 
like  *'  tartans ",  and  we  may  believe  Varro,  who 
tells  us  that  they  **  made  a  gaudy  show ".  The 
men  alone  seem  to  have  worn  hats,  which  were 
of  soft  felt,  the  women's  hair  being  uncovered, 
and  tied  in  a  knot  behind.  In  time  of  battle, 
the  men  also  dispensed  with  any  head-covering, 
brushing  their  abundant  hair  forward  into  a  thick 
mass,  and  dyeing  it  red  with  a  soap  made  of 
goat's  fat  and  beech  ashes,  until  they  looked  (says 
Cicero's  tutor  Posidonius,  who  visited  Britain  about 

1  See  Elton:  Origins  of  English  History,  chap.  VI  i. 


Wko  were  the  '^Ancient  Britons'' ?        27 

no  B.C.)  less  like  human  beings  than  wild  men  of 
the  woods.  Both  sexes  were  fond  of  ornaments, 
which  took  the  form  of  gold  bracelets,  rings,  pins, 
and  brooches,  and  of  beads  of  amber,  glass,  and  jet. 
Their  knives,  daggers,  spear-heads,  axes,  and  swords 
were  made  of  bronze  or  iron;  their  shields  were  the 
same  round  target  used  by  the  Highlanders  at  the 
battle  of  Culloden;  and  they  seem  also  to  have  had 
a  kind  of  lasso  to  which  a  hammer-shaped  ball  was 
attached,  and  which  they  used  as  the  Gauchos  of 
South  America  use  their  bola.  Their  war-chariots 
were  made  of  wicker,  the  wooden  wheels  being 
^  armed  with  sickles  of  bronze.  These  were  drawn 
either  by  two  or  four  horses,  and  were  large  enough 
to  hold  several  persons  in  each.  Standing  in  these, 
they  rushed  along  the  enemy's  lines,  hurling  darts, 
and  driving  the  scythes  against  all  who  came  within 
reach.  The  Romans  were  much  impressed  by  the 
skill  of  the  drivers,  who  ''could  check  their  horses 
at  full  speed  on  a  steep  incline,  and  turn  them  in  an 
instant,  and  could  run  along  the  pole,  and  stand  on 
the  yoke,  and  then  get  back  into  their  chariots 
again  without  a  moment's  delay  ".-^ 

With  these  accounts  of  the  Roman  writers  we 
may  compare  the  picture  of  the  Gaelic  hero,  Cuchu- 
lainn,  as  the  ancient  Irish  writers  describe  him 
dressed  and  armed  for  battle.  Glorified  by  the 
bard,  he  yet  wears  essentially  the  same  costume 
and  equipment  which  the  classic  historians  and 
geographers  described  more  soberly.  **  His  gor- 
geous raiment  that  he  wore  in  great  conventions" 

^  Caesar :  De  Bello  Gallico,  Book  IV,  chap,  xxxiii. 


28  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

consisted  of  ''a  fair  crimson  tunic  of  five  plies  and 
fringed,  with  a  long  pin  of  white  silver,  gold-enchased 
and  patterned,  shining  as  if  it  had  been  a  luminous 
torch  which  for  its  blazing  property  and  brilliance, 
men  might  not  endure  to  see.  Next  his  skin,  a 
body-vest  of  silk,  bordered  and  fringed  all  round 
with  gold,  with  silver,  and  with  white  bronze,  which 
vest  came  as  far  as  the  upper  edge  of  his  russet- 
coloured  kilt.  .  .  .  About  his  neck  were  a  hundred 
linklets  of  red  gold  that  flashed  again,  with  pendants 
hanging  from  them.  His  head-gear  was  adorned 
with  a  hundred  mixed  carbuncle  jewels,  strung." 
He  carried  ''a  trusty  special  shield,  in  hue  dark 
crimson,  and  in  its  circumference  armed  with  a  pure 
white  silver  rim.  At  his  left  side  a  long  and  golden- 
hilted  sword.  Beside  him,  in  the  chariot,  a  lengthy 
spear;  together  with  a  keen,  aggression  -  boding 
javelin,  fitted  with  hurling  thong,  with  rivets  of 
white  bronze."^  Another  passage  of  Gaelic  saga 
describes  his  chariot.  It  was  made  of  fine  wood, 
with  wicker-work,  moving  on  wheels  of  white  bronze. 
It  had  a  high  rounded  frame  of  creaking  copper, 
a  strong  curved  yoke  of  gold,  and  a  pole  of  white 
silver,  with  mountings  of  white  bronze.  The  yellow 
reins  were  plaited,  and  the  shafts  were  as  hard  and 
straight  as  sword-blades.^ 

In  like  manner  the  ancient  Irish  writers  have 
made  glorious  the  halls  and  fortresses  of  their 
mythical  kings.  Like  the  palaces  of  Priam,  of 
Menelaus,  and  of  Odysseus,  they  gleam  with  gold 

*  From  the  Tain  B6  Chuailgni.    The  translator  is  Mr.  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady. 

*  Tochmarc  Entire — the  Wooing  of  Enter — an  old  Irish  romance. 


Wko  were  the  ^^  Ancient  Britons''?        29 

and  gems.  Conchobar/  the  legendary  King  of 
Ulster  in  its  golden  age,  had  three  such  ''houses" 
at  Emain  Macha.  Of  the  one  called  the  ''  Red 
Branch  ",  we  are  told  that  it  contained  nine  com- 
partments of  red  yew,  partitioned  by  walls  of  bronze, 
all  grouped  around  the  king's  private  chamber, 
which  had  a  ceiling  of  silver,  and  bronze  pillars 
adorned  with  gold  and  carbuncles.^  But  the  far 
less  magnificent  accounts  of  the  Latin  writers  have, 
no  doubt,  more  truth  in  them  than  such  lavish 
pictures.  They  described  the  Britons  they  knew 
as  living  in  villages  of  bee-hive  huts,  roofed  with 
fern  or  thatch,  from  which,  at  the  approach  of  an 
enemy,  they  retired  to  the  local  dun.  This,  so  far 
from  being  elaborate,  merely  consisted  of  a  round 
or  oval  space  fenced  in  with  palisades  and  earth- 
works, and  situated  either  upon  the  top  of  a  hill  or 
in  the  midst  of  a  not  easily  traversable  morass.^  We 
may  see  the  remains  of  such  strongholds  in  many 
parts  of  England — notable  ones  are  the  ''  castles  "  of 
Amesbury,  Avebury,  and  Old  Sarum  in  Wiltshire, 
Saint  Catherine's  Hill,  near  Winchester,  and  Saint 
George's  Hill,  in  Surrey — and  it  is  probable  that,  in 
spite  of  the  Celtic  praisers  of  past  days,  the  '*  palaces" 
of  Emain  Macha  and  of  Tara  were  very  like  them. 

The  Celtic  customs  were,  like  the  Homeric,  those 
of  the  primitive  world.  All  land  (though  it  may 
have  theoretically  belonged  to  the  chief)  was  culti- 
vated in  common.     This  community  of  possessions 

^  Sometimes  spelt  "Conachar",  and  pronounced  Conhower  ox  Connor. 
'^  The  Wooing  of  Emer. 

3  Caesar ;    De  Bello  Gallico,    Book  V,    chap,    xxi,  and  various   passages  in 
Book  VII. 


30  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

is  stated  by  Caesar^  to  have  extended  to  their  wives; 
but  the  imputation  cannot  be  said  to  have  been 
proved.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  stories  of  both 
branches  of  the  Celtic  race,  women  seem  to  have 
taken  a  higher  place  in  men's  estimation,  and  to 
have  enjoyed  far  more  personal  liberty,  than  among 
the  Homeric  Greeks.  The  idea  may  have  arisen 
from  a  misunderstanding  of  some  of  the  curious 
Celtic  customs.  Descent  seems  to  have  been  traced 
through  the  maternal  rather  than  through  the  pa- 
ternal line,  a  very  un-Aryan  procedure  which  some 
believe  to  have  been  borrowed  from  another  race. 
The  parental  relation  was  still  further  lessened  by 
the  custom  of  sending  children  to  be  brought  up 
outside  the  family  in  which  they  were  born,  so  that 
they  had  foster-parents  to  whom  they  were  as  much, 
or  even  more,  attached  than  to  their  natural  ones. 

Their  political  state,  mirroring  their  family  life, 
was  not  less  primitive.  There  was  no  central 
tribunal.  Disputes  were  settled  within  the  families 
in  which  they  occurred,  while,  in  the  case  of  graver 
injuries,  the  injured  party  or  his  nearest  relation 
could  kill  the  culprit  or  exact  a  fine  from  him.  As 
families  increased  in  number,  they  became  petty 
tribes,  often  at  war  with  one  another.  A  defeated 
tribe  had  to  recognize  the  sovereignty  of  the  head 
man  of  the  conquering  tribe,  and  a  succession  of 
such  victories  exalted  him  into  the  position  of  a 
chief  of  his  district.  But  even  then,  though  his 
decision  was  the  whole  of  the  law,  he  was  little 
more  than  the  mouthpiece  of  public  opinion. 

1  Ibid.,  chap.  xiv. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE    RELIGION    OF    THE   ANCIENT    BRITONS   AND 

DRUIDISM 

The  ancient  inhabitants  of  Britain — the  Gaelic 
and  British  Celts — have  been  already  described  as 
forming  a  branch  of  what  are  roughly  called  the 
**  Aryans  ".  This  name  has,  however,  little  reference 
to  race,  and  really  signifies  the  speakers  of  a  group 
of  languages  which  can  be  all  shown  to  be  con- 
nected, and  to  descend  remotely  from  a  single  source 
— a  hypothetical  mother-tongue  spoken  by  a  hypo- 
thetical people  which  we  term  '* Aryan",  or,  more 
correctly,  ''  Indo-European  ".  This  primeval  speech, 
evolved,  probably,  upon  some  part  of  the  great 
plain  which  stretches  from  the  mountains  of  Central 
Europe  to  the  mountains  of  Central  Asia,  has  spread, 
superseding,  or  amalgamating  with  the  tongues  of 
other  races,  until  branches  of  it  are  spoken  over 
almost  the  whole  of  Europe  and  a  great  portion 
of  Asia.  All  the  various  Latin,  Greek,  Slavic, 
Teutonic,  and  Celtic  languages  are  **  Aryan ", 
as  well  as  Persian  and  other  Asiatic  dialects 
derived  from  the  ancient  ''Zend",  and  the  numer- 
ous Indian  languages  which  trace  their  origin  to 
Sanscrit. 

Not  very  long   ago,   it  was  supposed   that   this 

81 


32  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

common  descent  of  language  involved  a  common 
descent  of  blood.  A  real  brotherhood  was  enthusi- 
astically claimed  for  all  the  principal  European 
nations,  who  were  also  invited  to  recognize  Hindus 
and  Persians  as  their  long-lost  cousins.  Since  then, 
it  has  been  conceded  that,  while  the  Aryan  speech 
survived,  though  greatly  modified,  the  Aryan  blood 
might  well  have  disappeared,  diluted  beyond  recog- 
nition by  crossing  with  the  other  races  whom  the 
Aryans  conquered,  or  among  whom  they  more  or  less 
peacefully  settled.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  no 
European  nations — perhaps  no  people  at  all  except 
a  few  remote  savage  tribes — which  are  not  made  up 
of  the  most  diverse  elements.  Aryan  and  non-Aryan 
long  ago  blended  inextricably,  to  form  by  their  fusion 
new  peoples. 

But,  just  as  the  Aryan  speech  influenced  the  new 
languages,  and  the  Aryan  customs  the  new  civiliza- 
tions, so  we  can  still  discern  in  the  religions  of  the 
Aryan-speaking  nations  similar  ideas  and  expressions 
pointing  to  an  original  source  of  mythological  con- 
ceptions. Hence,  whether  we  investigate  the  myth- 
ology of  the  Hindus,  the  Greeks,  the  Teutons,  or 
the  Celts,  we  find  the  same  mythological  ground-*-^ 
work.  In  each,  we  see  the  powers  of  nature  per- 
sonified, and  endowed  with  human  form  and  attri- 
butes, though  bearing,  with  few  exceptions,  different 
names.  Like  the  Vedic  brahmans,  the  Greek  and 
Latin  poets,  and  the  Norse  scalds,  the  Celtic  bards 
— whether  Gaels  or  Britons — imagined  the  sky,  the 
sun,  the  moon,  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  the  dark 
underworld,  as  well  as  the  mountains,  the  streams 


CELTIC   WORSHIP 
From  the  Draiving  by  E.  fVallcousins 


Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  ^^i^ 

and  the  woods,  to  be  ruled  by  beings  like  their  own 
chiefs,  but  infinitely  more  powerful;  every  passion, 
as  War  and  Love,  and  every  art,  as  Poetry  and 
Smithcraft,  had  its  divine  founder,  teacher,  and 
exponent;  and  of  all  these  deities  and  their  imagined 
children,  they  wove  the  poetical  and  allegorical 
romances  which  form  the  subject  of  the  present 
volume. 

Like  other  nations,  too,  whether  Aryan  or  non- 
Aryan,  the  Celts  had,  besides  their  mythology,  a 
religion.  It  is  not  enough  to  tell  tales  of  shadowy 
gods;  they  must  be  made  visible  by  sculpture, 
housed  in  groves  or  temples,  served  with  ritual, 
and  propitiated  with  sacrifices,  if  one  is  to  hope 
for  their  favours.  Every  cult  must  have  its  priests 
living  by  the  altar. 

The  priests  of  the  Celts  are  well-known  to  us  by 
name  as  the  '*  Druids  " — a  word  derived  from  a  root 
DR  which  signifies  a  tree,  and  especially  the  oak,  in 
several  Aryan  languages.^  This  is  generally — though 
not  by  all  scholars — taken  as  proving  that  they  paid 
an  especial  veneration  to  the  king  of  trees.  It  is 
true  that  the  mistletoe — that  strange  parasite  upon 
the  oak — was  prominent  among  their  '*  herbs  of 
power  ",  and  played  a  part  in  their  ritual;^  but  this  is 
equally  true  of  other  Aryan  nations.  By  the  Norse 
it  was  held  sacred  to  the  god  Balder,  while  the 
Romans  believed  it  to  be  the  ** golden  bough"  that 
gave  access  to  Hades.^ 


^  See  Schrader :  Prehistoric  Antiquities  of  the  Aryan  Peoples,  pp.  138,  272. 
'  A  description  of  the  Druidical  cult  of  the  mistletoe  is  given  by  Pliny :  Natural 
History,  XVI,  chap.  xcv.  3  See  Frazer:   The  Golden  Bou^h,  chap.  IV. 

(B219)  0 


34  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

The  accounts  both  of  the  Latin  and  Gaelic  writers 
give  us  a  fairly  complete  idea  of  the  nature  of  the 
Druids,  and  especially  of  the  high  estimation  in 
which  they  were  held.  They  were  at  once  the. 
priests,  the  physicians,  the  wizards,  the  diviners,  the 
theologians,  the  scientists,  and  the  historians  of  their 
tribes.  All  spiritual  power  and  all  human  know- 
ledge were  vested  in  them,  and  they  ranked  second 
only  to  the  kings  and  chiefs.  They  were  freed  from 
all  contribution  to  the  State,  whether  by  tribute  or 
service  in  war,  so  that  they  might  the  better  apply 
themselves  to  their  divine  offices.  Their  decisions 
were  absolutely  final,  and  those  who  disobeyed  them 
were  laid  under  a  terrible  excommunication  or 
'*  boycott ''}  Classic  writers  tell  us  how  they  lorded 
it  in  Gaul,  where,  no  doubt,  they  borrowed  splendour 
by  imitating  their  more  civilized  neighbours.  Men 
of  the  highest  rank  were  proud  to  cast  aside  the 
insignia  of  mere  mortal  honour  to  join  the  company 
of  those  who  claimed  to  be  the  direct  mediators  with 
the  sky-god  and  the  thunder-god,  and  who  must 
have  resembled  the  ecclesiastics  of  mediaeval  Europe 
in  the  days  of  their  greatest  power,  combining,  like 
them,  spiritual  and  temporal  dignities,  and  possessing 
the  highest  culture  of  their  age.  Yet  it  was  not 
among  these  Druids  of  Gaul,  with  their  splendid 
temples  and  vestments  and  their  elaborate  rituals, 
that  the  metropolis  of  Druidism  was  to  be  sought. 
We  learn  from  Caesar  that  the  Gallic  Druids  be- 

1  Caesar:  De  Bdlo  Gallico,  Book  VI,  chaps,  xiii,  Xiv.  But  for  a  full  exposition 
of  what  is  known  of  the  Druids  the  reader  is  referred  to  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's 
Introduction  a  Vitude  de  la  Littirature  Celtigue,  Vol.  I  of  his  Cours  de  Littirature 
Celtique. 


Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  35 

lieved  their  religion  to  have  come  to  them,  originally, 
from  Britain,  and  that  it  was  their  practice  to  send 
their  "'  theological  students  "  across  the  Channel  to 
learn  its  doctrines  at  their  purest  source.^  To  trace 
a  cult  backwards  is  often  to  take  a  retrograde  course 
in  culture,  and  it  was  no  doubt  in  Britain — which 
Pliny  the  Elder  tells  us  **  might  have  taught  magic 
to  Persia"^  —  that  the  sufficiently  primitive  and 
savage  rites  of  the  Druids  of  Gaul  were  preserved 
in  their  still  more  savage  and  primitive  forms.  It  is 
curious  corroboration  of  this  alleged  British  origin  of 
Druidism  that  the  ancient  Irish  also  believed  their 
Druidism  to  have  come  from  the  sister  island.  Their 
heroes  and  seers  are  described  as  only  gaining  the 
highest  knowledge  by  travelling  to  Alba.^  However 
this  may  be,  we  may  take  it  as  certain  that  this  Druid- 
ism was  the  accepted  religion  of  the  Celtic  race. 

Certain  scholars  look  deeper  for  its  origin,  hold- 
ing its  dark  superstitions  and  savage  rites  to  bear 
the  stamp  of  lower  minds  than  those  of  the  poetic 
and  manly  Celts.  Professor  Rhys  inclines  to  see 
three  forms  of  religion  in  the  British  Islands  at  the 
time  of  the  Roman  invasion:  the  ''Druidism"  of 
the  Iberian  aborigines;  the  pure  polytheism  of  the 
Brythons,  who,  having  come  later  into  the  country, 
had  mixed  but  little  with  the  natives;  and  the 
mingled  Aryan  and  non-Aryan  cults  of  the  Goidels, 
who  were  already  largely  amalgamated  with  them.* 

1  Caesar:  De  Bella  Gallico,  Book  VI,  chap.  xili. 

*  Pliny :  Natural  History,  XXX. 

*  See  chap.  Xil,  The  Irish  Iliad. 

*Rhys:  Celtic  Britain,  chap.   ii.     Sec  also  Gomme:    Ethnology  in  Folk-lore, 
pp.  58-62 ;   Village  Community,  p.  104. 


36  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

But  many  authorities  dissent  from  this  view,  and, 
indeed,  we  are  not  obliged  to  postulate  borrowing 
from  tribes  in  a  lower  state  of  culture,  to  explain 
primitive  and  savage  features  underlying  a  higher 
religion.  The  ''Aryan"  nations  must  have  passed, 
equally  with  all  others,  through  a  state  of  pure 
savagery;  and  we  know  that  the  religion  of  the 
Greeks,  in  many  respects  so  lofty,  sheltered  features 
and  legends  as  barbarous  as  any  that  can  be  attri- 
buted to  the  Celts.  ^ 

Of  the  famous  teaching  of  the  Druids  we  know 
little,  owing  to  their  habit  of  never  allowing  their 
doctrines  to  be  put  into  writing.  Caesar,  however, 
roughly  records  its  scope.  "  As  one  of  their  leading 
dogmas",  he  says,  ''they  inculcate  this:  that  souls 
are  not  annihilated,  but  pass  after  death  from  one 
body  to  another,  and  they  hold  that  by  this  teaching 
men  are  much  encouraged  to  valour,  through  dis- 
regarding the  fear  of  death.  They  also  discuss  and 
impart  to  the  young  many  things  concerning  the 
heavenly  bodies  and  their  movements,  the  size  of 
the  world  and  of  our  earth,  natural  science,  and  of 
the  influence  and  power  of  the  immortal  gods."^ 
The  Romans  seem  to  have  held  their  wisdom  in 
some  awe,  though  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Druids 
themselves  borrowed  whatever  knowledge  they  may 
have  had  of  science  and  philosophy  from  the  clas- 
sical culture.  That  their  creed  of  transmigration 
was  not,  however,  merely  taken  over  from  the 
Greeks  seems  certain  from   its  appearance  in  the 

1  Abundant  evidence  of  this  is  contained  in  Pausanias'  Description  of  Greece, 
*  Caesar:  De  Bello  Gallico,  Book  VI,  chap.  xiv. 


Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  37 

ancient  Gaelic  myths.  Not  only  the  **  shape-shift- 
ing "  common  to  the  magic  stories  of  all  nations,  but 
actual  reincarnation  was  in  the  power  of  privileged 
beings.  The  hero  Cuchulainn  was  urged  by  the 
men  of  Ulster  to  marry,  because  they  knew  **that 
his  rebirth  would  be  of  himself",^  3<nd  they  did  not 
wish  so  great  a  warrior  to  be  lost  to  their  tribe. 
Another  legend  tells  how  the  famous  Finn  mac  Coul 
was  reborn,  after  two  hundred  years,  as  an  Ulster 
king  called  Mongan.^ 

Such  ideas,  however,  belonged  to  the  metaphysical 
side  of  Druidism.  Far  more  important  to  the  prac- 
tical primitive  mind  are  ritual  and  sacrifice,  by  the 
due  performance  of  which  the  gods  are  persuaded 
or  compelled  to  grant  earth's  increase  and  length  of 
days  to  men.  Among  the  Druids,  this  humouring  of 
the  divinities  took  the  shape  of  human  sacrifice,  and 
that  upon  a  scale  which  would  seem  to  have  been 
unsurpassed  in  horror  even  by  the  most  savage 
tribes  of  West  Africa  or  Polynesia.  ''  The  whole 
Gaulish  nation  ",  says  Caesar,  '*  is  to  a  great  degree 
devoted  to  superstitious  rites;  and  on  this  account 
those  who  are  afflicted  with  severe  diseases,  or  who 
are  engaged  in  battles  and  dangers,  either  sacrifice 
human  beings  for  victims,  or  vow  that  they  will 
immolate  themselves,  and  these  employ  the  Druids 
as  ministers  for  such  sacrifices,  because  they  think 
that,  unless  the  life  of  man  be  repaid  for  the  life 
of  man,  the  will  of  the  immortal  gods  cannot  be 

»The  Wooing  of  Emer. 

*  It  is  contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  and  has  been  translated  or  com- 
mented upon  by  Eugene  O'Curry  {Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish), 
De  Jubain villa  {Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais),  and  Nutt  ( Voyage  of  Bran). 


38  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

appeased.  They  also  ordain  national  offerings  of  the 
same  kind.  Others  make  wicker-work  images  of 
vast  size,  the  limbs  of  which  they  fill  with  living  men 
and  set  on  fire."^ 

We  find  evidence  of  similarly  awful  customs  in 
pagan  Ireland.  Among  the  oldest  Gaelic  records 
are  tracts  called  Dinnsenchus,  in  which  famous  places 
are  enumerated,  together  with  the  legends  relating 
to  them.  Such  topographies  are  found  in  several  of 
the  great  Irish  mediaeval  manuscripts,  and  therefore, 
of  course,  received  their  final  transcription  at  the 
hands  of  Christian  monks.  But  these  ecclesiastics 
rarely  tampered  with  compositions  in  elaborate 
verse.  Nor  can  it  be  imagined  that  any  monastic 
scribe  could  have  invented  such  a  legend  as  this  one 
which  describes  the  practice  of  human  sacrifice  among 
the  ancient  Irish.  The  poem  (which  is  found  in  the 
Books  of  Leinster,  of  Ballymote,  of  Lecan,  and  in  a 
document  called  the  Rennes  MS.)^  records  the  reason 
why  a  spot  near  the  present  village  of  Ballymagauran, 
in  County  Cavan,  received  the  name  of  Mag  Slecht, 
the  "  Plain  of  Adoration  ". 

"  Here  used  to  be 
A  high  idol  with  many  fights. 
Which  was  named  the  Cromm  Cruaich; 
It  made  every  tribe  to  be  without  peace. 

"  'T  was  a  sad  evil ! 
Brave  Gaels  used  to  worship  it. 

»  Caesar:  De  Bello  Gallico,  Book  VI,  chap.  xvi. 

'The  following  translation  was  made  by  Dr.  Kuno  Meyer,  and  appears  as 
Appendix  B  to  Nutt's  Voyage  of  Bran.  Three  verses,  here  omitted,  will  be  found 
later  as  a  note  to  chap,  xii — "The  Irish  lUad ". 


Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  39 

From  it  they  would  not  without  tribute  ask 

To  be  satisfied  as  to  their  portion  of  the  hard  world. 

"  He  was  their  god, 
The  withered  Cromm  with  many  mists, 
The  people  whom  he  shook  over  every  host, 
The  everlasting  kingdom  they  shall  not  have. 

"  To  him  without  glory 
They  would  kill  their  piteous,  wretched  offspring 
With  much  wailing  and  peril. 
To  pour  their  blood  around  Cromm  Cruaich. 

"  Milk  and  corn 
They  would  ask  from  him  speedily 
In  return  for  one-third  of  their  healthy  issue: 
Great  was  the  horror  and  the  scare  of  him. 

"To  him 
Noble  Gaels  would  prostrate  themselves, 
From  the  worship  of  him,  with  many  manslaughters, 
The  plain  is  called  "  Mag  Slecht ". 

•  ••••• 

"They  did  evil, 
They  beat  their  palms,  they  pounded  their  bodies. 
Wailing  to  the  demon  who  enslaved  them, 
They  shed  falling  showers  of  tears. 

"Around  Cromm  Cruaich 
There  the  hosts  would  prostrate  themselves; 
Though  he  put  them  under  deadly  disgrace, 
Their  name  clings  to  the  noble  plain. 

"  In  their  ranks  (stood) 
Four  times  three  stone  idols; 
To  bitterly  beguile  the  hosts. 
The  figure  of  the  Cromm  was  made  of  gold. 


40  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"  Since  the  rule 
Of  Herimon^,  the  noble  man  of  grace, 
There  was  worshipping  of  stones 
Until  the  coming  of  good  Patrick  of  Macha. 

"  A  sledge-hammer  to  the  Cromm 
He  applied  from  crown  to  sole, 
He  destroyed  without  lack  of  valour 
The  feeble  idol  which  was  there." 


Such,  we  gather  from  a  tradition  which  we  may 
deem  authentic,  was  human  sacrifice  in  early  Ireland. 
According  to  the  quoted  verse,  one  third  of  the 
healthy  children  were  slaughtered,  presumably  every 
year,  to  wrest  from  the  powers  of  nature  the  grain 
and  grass  upon  which  the  tribes  and  their  cattle  sub- 
sisted. In  a  prose  dtnnsenchus  preserved  in  the 
Rennes  MS.,^  there  is  a  slight  variant.  '' 'T  is 
there",  (at  Mag  Slecht),  it  runs,  ''  was  the  king  idol 
of  Erin,  namely  the  Crom  Croich,  and  around  him 
were  twelve  idols  made  of  stones,  but  he  was  of 
gold.  Until  Patrick's  advent  he  was  the  god  of 
every  folk  that  colonized  Ireland.  To  him  they 
used  to  offer  the  firstlings  of  every  issue  and  the 
chief  scions  of  every  clan."  The  same  authority 
also  tells  us  that  these  sacrifices  were  made  at 
**  Hallowe'en",  which  took  the  place,  in  the  Chris- 
tian calendar,  of  the  heathen  Samhain — "  Summer's 
End "  —  when  the  sun's  power  waned,  and  the 
strength  of  the  gods  of  darkness,  winter,  and  the 
underworld  grew  great. 

1  The  first  King  of  the  Milesians.     The  name  is  more  usually  spelt  Eremon. 

2  The  Rennes  Dtnnsenchus  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes  m  Vol.  XVI 
of  the  Revue  Celtique. 


Religion  of  the  A  ncient  Britons  4 1 

Who,  then,  was  this  bloodthirsty  deity?  His 
-  name,  Cromm  Cruaich,  means  the  ''  Bowed  One  of 
the  Mound",  and  was  evidently  applied  to  him  only 
after  his  fall  from  godhead.  It  relates  to  the  tra- 
dition that,  at  the  approach  of  the  all-conquering 
Saint  Patrick,  the  ** demon"  fled  from  his  golden 
image,  which  thereupon  sank  forward  in  the  earth 
in  homage  to  the  power  that  had  come  to  supersede 
it.^  But  from  another  source  we  glean  that  the 
word  cromm  was  a  kind  of  pun  upon  cenn,  and  that 
the  real  title  of  the  ''king  idol  of  Erin"  was  Cenn 
Cruaick,  "  Head"  or  '*  Lord"  of  the  Mound.  Pro- 
fessor Rhys,  in  his  Celtic  Heathendom,'^  suggests  that 
he  was  probably  the  Gaelic  heaven-god,  worshipped, 
like  the  Hellenic  Zeus,  upon  ''high  places",  natural 
or  artificial.  At  any  rate,  we  may  see  in  him  the 
god  most  revered  by  the  Gaels,  surrounded  by  the 
other  twelve  chief  members  of  their  Pantheon. 

It  would  appear  probable  that  the  Celtic  State 
worship  was  what  is  called  "solar".  All  its  chief 
festivals  related  to  points  in  the  sun's  progress,  the 
equinoxes  having  been  considered  more  important 
than  the  solstices.  It  was  at  the  spring  equinox 
(called  by  the  Celts  "  Beltaine"^)  in  every  nine- 
teenth year  that,  we  learn  from  Diodorus  the  Sicilian, 
a  writer  contemporary  with  Julius  Caesai,  Apollo 
himself  appeared  to  his  worshippers,  and  was  seen 
harping  and  dancing  in  the  sky  until  the  rising  of 
the  Pleiades.*    The  other  corresponding  festival  was 

^  Told  in  the  Tripartite  Life  of  Saint  Patrick,  a  fifteenth-century  combination  of 
three  very  ancient  Gaelic  MSS. 

-The  Hibbert  Lectures  for  1886,     Lecture  II— "The  Zeus  of  the  Insular  Celts". 
3  Pronounced  ^a///nna.  ^  Diodorus  Siculus:  Book  II,  chap,  iii 


42  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

**Samhain"^  the  autumn  equinox.  As  Beltaine 
marked  the  beginning  of  summer,  so  Samhain  re- 
corded its  end.  The  summer  solstice  was  also  a 
great  Celtic  feast.  It  was  held  at  the  beginning  of 
August  in  honour  of  the  god  called  Lugus  by  the 
Gauls,  Lugh  by  the  Gaels,  and  Lieu  by  the  Britons 
— the  pan-Celtic  Apollo,  and,  probably,  when  the 
cult  of  the  war-god  had  fallen  from  its  early  pro- 
minence, the  chief  figure  of  the  common  Pantheon. 

It  was  doubtless  at  Stonehenge  that  the  British 
Apollo  was  thus  seen  harping  and  dancing.  That 
marvellous  structure  well  corresponds  to  Diodorus's 
description  of  a  ''magnificent  temple  of  Apollo" 
which  he  locates  '*in  the  centre  of  Britain".  "  It  is 
a  circular  enclosure,"  he  says,  ''adorned  with  votive 
offerings  and  tablets  with  Greek  inscriptions  sus- 
pended by  travellers  upon  the  walls.  The  rulers  of 
the  temple  and  city  are  called  '  Boreadae'^  and  they 
take  up  the  government  from  each  other  according 
to  the  order  of  their  tribes.  The  citizens  are  given 
up  to  music,  harping  and  chanting  in  honour  of  the 
sun."*  Stonehenge,  therefore,  was  a  sacred  religious 
centre,  equally  revered  by  and  equally  belonging  to 
all  the  British  tribes — ^a  Rome  or  Jerusalem  of  our 
ancient  paganism. 

The  same  great  gods  were,  no  doubt,  adored  by 
all  the  Celts,  not  only  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
but  of  Continental  Gaul  as  well.  Sometimes  they 
can    be    traced    by   name   right   across    the  ancient 


^  Pronounced  Sowin. 

'  It  has  been  suggested  that  this  title  is  an  attempt  to  reproduce  the  ancient 
British  word  for  "  bards".  ^ Diodorus  Sicnlus:  Book  II,  chap.  ill. 


PORTION   OF  THE  CIRCLE,    STONEHENGE 


Frith. 


Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  43 

Celtic  world.  In  other  cases,  what  is  obviously  the 
same  personified  power  of  nature  is  found  in  various 
places  with  the  same  attributes,  but  with  a  different 
title.  Besides  these,  there  must  have  been  a  mul- 
titude of  lesser  gods,  worshipped  by  certain  tribes 
alone,  to  whom  they  stood  as  ancestors  and  guar- 
dians. **  I  swear  by  the  gods  of  my  people",  was 
the  ordinary  oath  of  a  hero  in  the  ancient  Gaelic 
sagas.  The  aboriginal  tribes  must  also  have  had 
their  gods,  whether  it  be  true  or  not  that  their  re- 
ligion influenced  the  Celtic  Druidism.  Professor 
Rhys  inclines  to  see  in  the  genii  locorum,  the  almost 
nameless  spirits  of  well  and  river,  mountain  and 
wood — shadowy  remnants  of  whose  cults  survive  to- 
day,— members  of  a  swarming  Pantheon  of  the  older 
Iberians.^  These  local  beings  would  in  no  way  con- 
flict with  the  great  Celtic  nature-gods,  and  the  two 
worships  could  exist  side  by  side,  both  even  claiming 
the  same  votary.  It  needs  the  stern  faith  of  mono- 
theism to  deny  the  existence  of  the  gods  of  others. 
Polytheistic  nations  have  seldom  or  never  risen  to 
such  a  height.  In  their  dealings  with  a  conquered 
people,  the  conquerors  naturally  held  their  own  gods 
to  be  the  stronger.  Still,  it  could  not  be  denied  that 
the  gods  of  the  conquered  were  upon  their  own 
ground;  they  knew,  so  to  speak,  the  country,  and 
might  have  unguessed  powers  of  doing  evil!  What 
if,  to  avenge  their  worshippers  and  themselves,  they 
were  to  make  the  land  barren  and  useless  to  the  con- 
querors? So  that  conquering  pagan  nations  have 
usually  been  quite  ready  to  stretch  out  the  hand  of 

*  Hibbert  Lectures,  i886.     Lecture  I — "The  Gaulish  Pantheon" 


44  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

welcome  to  the  deities  of  their  new  subjects,  to  pro- 
pitiate them  by  sacrifice,  and  even  to  admit  them 
within  the  pale  of  their  own  Pantheon. 

This  raises  the  question  of  the  exact  nationality  of 
the  gods  whose  stories  we  are  about  to  tell.  Were 
they  all  Aryan,  or  did  any  of  the  greater  aboriginal 
deities  climb  up  to  take  their  place  among  the  Gaelic 
tribe  of  the  goddess  Danu,  or  the  British  children 
of  the  goddess  Don?  Some  of  the  Celtic  gods  have 
seemed  to  scholars  to  bear  signs  of  a  non-Aryan 
origin.^  The  point,  however,  is  at  present  very 
obscure.  Neither  does  it  much  concern  us.  Just 
as  the  diverse  deities  of  the  Greeks — some  Aryan 
and  Hellenic,  some  pre-Aryan  and  Pelasgian,  some 
imported  and  Semitic — were  all  gathered  into  one 
great  divine  family,  so  we  may  consider  as  members 
of  one  national  Olympus  all  these  gods  whose 
legends  make  up  *'  The  Mythology  of  the  British 
Islands". 

^  See  Rhys ;  Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology,  pp.  426,  552,  653. 


THE  GAELIC  GODS  AND  THEIR 

STORIES 


CHAPTER   V 

THE   GODS    OF    THE   GAELS 

Of  the  two  Celtic  races  that  settled  in  our  islands, 
it  is  the  earlier,  the  Gaels,  that  has  best  preserved 
its  old  mythology.  It  is  true  that  we  have  in  few 
cases  such  detailed  account  of  the  Gaelic  gods  as  we 
gain  of  the  Hellenic  deities  from  the  Greek  poets,  of 
the  Indian  Devas  from  the  Rig  Veda,  or  of  the 
Norse  ^sir  from  the  Eddas.  Yet  none  the  less 
may  we  draw  from  the  ancient  Irish  manuscripts 
quite  enough  information  to  enable  us  to  set  forth 
their  figures  with  some  clearness.  We  find  them,  as 
might  have  been  anticipated,  very  much  like  the 
divine  hierarchies  of  other  Aryan  peoples. 

We  also  find  them  separated  into  two  opposing 
camps,  a  division  common  to  all  the  Aryan  religions. 
Just  as  the  Olympians  struggled  with  the  Giants, 
the  iEsir  fought  the  Jotuns,  and  the  Devas  the 
Asuras,  so  there  is  warfare  in  the  Gaelic  spiritual 
world  between  two  superhuman  hosts.  On  one  side 
are  ranged  the  gods  of  day,  light,  life,  fertility, 
wisdom,  and  good;  on  the  other,  the  demons  of 
night,  darkness,  death,  barrenness,  and  evil.  The 
first  were  the  great  spirits  symbolizing  the  beneficial 
aspects  of  nature  and  the  arts  and  intelligence  of 
man ;  the  second  were  the  hostile  powers  thought  to 
be  behind  such  baneful  manifestations  as  storm  and 

47 


48  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

fog,  drought  and  disease.  The  first  are  ranged  as 
a  divine  family  round  a  goddess  called  Danu,  from 
whom  they  took  their  well-known  name  of  Tuatha 
DS  Danann^  ''Tribe"  or  "Folk  of  the  Goddess 
Danu".  The  second  owned  allegiance  to  a  female 
divinity  called  Domnu;  their  king,  Indech,  is  de- 
scribed as  her  son,  and  they  are  all  called  "  Domnu's 
gods".  The  word  "  Domnu"  appears  to  have  sig- 
nified the  abyss  or  the  deep  sea,^  and  the  same 
idea  is  also  expressed  in  their  better-known  name  of 
"  Fomors",  derived  from  two  Gaelic  words  meaning 
**  under  sea".^  The  waste  of  water  seems  to  have 
always  impressed  the  Celts  with  the  sense  of  prim- 
eval ancientness;  it  was  connected  in  their  minds 
with  vastness,  darkness,  and  monstrous  births — the 
very  antithesis  of  all  that  was  symbolized  by  the 
earth,  the  sky,  and  the  sun. 

Therefore  the  Fomors  were  held  to  be  more 
ancient  than  the  gods,  before  whom  they  were, 
however,  destined  to  fall  in  the  end.  Offspring  of 
''Chaos  and  Old  Night",  they  were,  for  the  most 
part,  huge  and  deformed.  Some  had  but  one  arm 
and  one  leg  apiece,  while  others  had  the  heads  of 
goats,  horses,  or  bulls.*  The  most  famous,  and 
perhaps  the  most  terrible  of  them  all  was  Balor, 
whose  father  is  said  to  have  been  one  Buarainech, 
that  is,  the  "cow-faced"/  and  who  combined  in  him- 
self the  two  classical  roles  of  the  Cyclops  and  the 
Medusa.     Though  he  had  two  eyes,  one  was  always 

^  Pronounced  Tooaha  dae  donnann, 

'Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  1886.     Lecture  VI — "  Gods,  Demons,  and  Heroes". 
*  Ibid.  *  De  Jubainville:  Le  Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais,  chap.  V. 

^  De  Jubainville :  Cycle  Mythologique  Jrlandais,  chap.  IX. 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  49 

kept  shut,  for  it  was  so  venomous  that  it  slew  any- 
one on  whom  its  look  fell.  This  malignant  quality 
of  Balor's  eye  was  not  natural  to  him,  but  was  the 
result  of  an  accident.  Urged  by  curiosity,  he  once 
looked  in  at  the  window  of  a  house  where  his 
fathers  sorcerers  were  preparing  a  magic  potion, 
and  the  poisonous  smoke  from  the  cauldron  reached 
his  eye,  infecting  it  with  so  much  of  its  own  deadly 
nature  as  to  make  it  disastrous  to  others.  Neither 
god  nor  giant  seems  to  have  been  exempt  from  its 
dangers ;  so  that  Balor  was  only  allowed  to  live  on 
condition  that  he  kept  his  terrible  eye  shut.  On 
days  of  battle  he  was  placed  opposite  to  the  enemy, 
the  lid  of  the  destroying  eye  was  lifted  up  with  a 
hook,  and  its  gaze  withered  all  who  stood  before  it. 
The  memory  of  Balor  and  his  eye  still  lingers  in 
Ireland:  the  **eye  of  Balor"  is  the  naiiie  for  what 
the  peasantry  of  other  countries  call  the  **evil  eye"; 
stories  are  still  told  of  Balar  Beimann,  or  **  Balor  of 
the  Mighty  Blows";  and  *'  Balor's  Castle"  is  the  name 
of  a  curious  cliff  on  Tory  Island.  This  island,  off 
the  coast  of  Donegal,  was  the  Fomorian  outpost 
upon  earth,  their  real  abode  being  in  the  cold  depths 
of  the  sea. 

This  rule,  however,  as  to  the  hideousness  of  the 
Fomors  had  its  exceptions.  Elathan,  one  of  their 
chiefs,  is  described  in  an  old  manuscript  as  of 
magnificent  presence  —  a  Miltonic  prince  of  dark- 
ness. '*A  man  of  fairest  form,"  it  says,  "with 
golden  hair  down  to  his  shoulders.  He  wore  a 
mantle  of  gold  braid  over  a  shirt  interwoven  with 
threads  of  gold.     Five  golden  necklaces  were  round 

( B  219 )  D 


50  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

his  neck,  and  a  brooch  of  gold  with  a  shining  precious 
stone  thereon  was  on  his  breast.  He  carried  two 
silver  spears  with  rivets  of  bronze,  and  his  sword 
was  golden-hilted  and  golden-studded."^  Nor  was 
his  son  less  handsome.  His  name  was  Bress,  which 
means  ''beautiful",  and  we  are  told  that  every 
beautiful  thing  in  Ireland,  ''whether  plain,  or  fortress, 
or  ale,  or  torch,  or  woman,  or  man",  was  compared 
with  him,  so  that  men  said  of  them,  "  that  is  a 
Bress  ".^ 

Balor,  Bress,  and  Elathan  are  the  three  Fomorian 
personages  whose  figures,  seen  through  the  mists  of 
antiquity,  show  clearest  to  us.  But  they  are  only  a 
few  out  of  many,  nor  are  they  the  oldest.  We  can 
learn,  however,  nothing  but  a  few  names  of  any  an- 
cestors of  the  Gaelic  giants.  This  is  equally  true  of 
the  Gaelic  gods.  Those  we  know  are  evidently  not 
without  parentage,  but  the  names  of  their  fathers  are 
no  more  than  shadows  following  into  oblivion  the 
figures  they  designated.  The  most  ancient  divinity 
of  whom  we  have  any  knowledge  is  Danu  herself, 
the  goddess_fn)mjyhom  the  whole  hierarchy  of  gods 
received  jts  name  of  Tuatha  D6  Danann.  She  was 
also  called  Anu  or  Ana,  and  her  name  still  clings  to 
two  well-known  mountains  near  Killarney,  which, 
though  now  called  simply  "The  Paps",  were  known 
formerly  as    the   "  Paps  of  Ana".^      She  was   the 


*  From  the  fifteenth -century  Harleian  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  numbered 
5280,  and  called  the  Second  Battle  of  Moytura.  ^  Harleian  MS.  5280. 

*  "  In  Munster  was  worshipped  the  goddess  of  prosperity,  whose  name  was  Ana, 
and  from  her  are  named  the  Two  Paps  of  Ana  over  Luachair  Degad."  From  Coir 
AnMann,  the  Choice  of  Names,  a  sixteenth-century  tract,  published  by  Dr.  Whitley 
Stokes  in  Irische  Texte. 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  51 

universal  mother-:- ''well  she  used  to  cherish  the 
gods",  says  the  commentator  of  a  ninth-century  Irish 
glossary.^  Her  husband  is  never  mentioned  by 
name,  but  one  may  assume  him,  from  British  analo- 
gies, to  have  been  Bil6,  known  to  Gaelic  tradition 
as  a  god  of  Hades,  a  kind  of  Celtic  Dis  Pater  from 
whom  sprang  the  first  men.  Danu  herself  probably 
represented  the  earth  and  its  fruitfulness,  and  one 
might  compare  her  with  the  Greek  Demeter.  All 
the  other  gods  are,  at  least  by  title,  her  children. 
The  greatest  of  these  would  seem  to  have  been 
Nuada,  called  Argetldm,  or  *'  He  of  the  Silver 
Hand".  He  was  at  once  the  Gaelic  Zeus,  or 
Jupiter,  and  their  war-god;  for  among  primitive 
nations,  to  whom  success  in  war  is  all-important,  the 
god  of  battles  is  the  supreme  god.^  Among  the 
Gauls,  Camulus,  whose  name  meant  "Heaven",'  was 
identified  by  the  Romans  with  Mars ;  and  other  such 
instances  come  readily  to  the  mind.  He  was  pos- 
sessed of  an  invincible  sword,  one  of  the  four  chief 
treasures  of  the  Tuatha  D^  Danann,  over  whom  he 
was  twice  king ;  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  he  was 
one  of  the  most  important  gods  of  both  the  Gaels 
and  the  Britons,  for  his  name  is  spread  over  the 
whole  of  the  British  Isles,  which  we  may  surmise 
the  Celts  conquered  under  his  auspices.  We  may 
picture  him  as  a  more  savage  Mars,  delighting  in 
battle  and  slaughter,  and  worshipped,  like  his 
Gaulish  affinities,  Teutates  and  Hesus,  of  whom  the 


*  Attributed  to  Cormac,  King-Bishop  of  Cashel. 

*  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  1886  —  "  The  Zeus  of  the  Insular  Cdta' 
3 Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  1886— "  The  Gaulish  Pantheon". 


52  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Latin  poet  Lucan  tells  us,  with  human  sacrifices, 
shared  in  by  his  female  consorts,  who,  we  may 
imagine,  were  not  more  mercifijl  than  himself,  or 
than  that  Gaulish  Taranis  whose  cult  was  **no 
gentler  than  that  of  the  Scythian  Diana",  and  who 
completes  Lucan  s  triad  as  a  fit  companion  to  the 
** pitiless  Teutates"  and  the  ''horrible  Hesus".^  Of 
these  warlike  goddesses  there  were  five — Fea,  the 
''Hateful",  Nemon,  the  "Venomous",  Badb,  the 
"Fury",  Macha,  a  personification  of  "battle",  and, 
over  all  of  them,  the  Morrigu,  or  "Great  Queen". 
This  supreme  war-goddess  of  the  Gaels,  who  re- 
sembles a  fiercer  Here,  perhaps  symbolized  the 
moon,  deemed  by  early  races  to  have  preceded  the 
sun,  and  worshipped  with  magical  and  cruel  rites. 
She  is  represented  as  going  fully  armed,  and  carry- 
ing two  spears  in  her  hand.  As  with  Ares^  and 
Poseidon^  in  the  "Iliad",  her  battle-cry  was  as  loud 
as  that  of  ten  thousand  men.  Wherever  there  was 
war,  either  among  gods  or  men,  she,  the  great  queen, 
was  present,  either  in  her  own  shape  or  in  her 
favourite  disguise,  that  of  a  "hoodie"  or  carrion 
crow.     An  old  poem  shows  her  inciting  a  warrior: 

"  Over  his  head  is  shrieking 

A  lean  hag,  quickly  hopping 
Over  the  points  of  the  weapons  and  shields ; 
She  is  the  gray-haired  Morrigu".* 

With  her,  Fea  and  Nemon,  Badb  and  Macha  also 

^  Pharsalia,  Book  1, 1.  444,  &c.: 

"  Et  quibus  immitis  placatur  sanguine  diro 

Teutates,  horrensque  feris  altaribus  Hesus ; 

Et  Taranis  Scythicae  non  mitior  ara  Dianae  ", 
'  Iliad,  Book  V.     3  Op.  cit. ,  Book  XIV.     *  It  commemorates  the  battle  of  Magh  Rath. 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  53 

hovered  over  the  fighters,  inspiring  them  with  the 
madness  of  battle.  All  of  these  were  sometimes 
called  by  the  name  of  **  Badb"^.  An  account  of  the 
Battle  of  Clontarf,  fought  by  Brian  Boru,  in  1014, 
against  the  Norsemen,  gives  a  gruesome  picture  of 
what  the  Gaels  believed  to  happen  in  the  spiritual 
world  when  battle  lowered  and  men's  blood  was 
aflame.  *'  There  arose  a  wild,  impetuous,  pre- 
cipitate, mad,  inexorable,  furious,  dark,  lacerating, 
merciless,  combative,  contentious  badb,  which  was 
shrieking  and  fluttering  over  their  heads.  And 
there  arose  also  the  satyrs,  and  sprites,  and  the 
maniacs  of  the  valleys,  and  the  witches  and  goblins 
and  owls,  and  destroying  demons  of  the  air  and 
firmament,  and  the  demoniac  phantom  host;  and 
they  were  inciting  and  sustaining  valour  and  battle 
with  them."  When  the  fight  was  over,  they  revelled 
among  the  bodies  of  the  slain;  the  heads  cut  off  as 
barbaric  trophies  were  called  '*  Macha  s  acorn  crop". 
These  grim  creations  of  the  savage  mind  had  im- 
mense vitality.  While  Nuada,  the  supreme  war- 
god,  vanished  early  out  of  the  Pantheon — killed  by 
the  Fomors  in  the  great  battle  fought  between  them 
and  the  gods — Badb  and  the  Morrigii  lived  on  as 
late  as  any  of  the  Gaelic  deities.  Indeed,  they  may 
be  said  to  still  survive  in  the  superstitious  dislike 
and  suspicion  shown  in  all  Celtic-speaking  countries 
for  their  avatar,  the  hoodie-crow.^ 

After   Nuada,  the  greatest  of  the  gods  was  the 


*  The  word  is  approximately  pronounced  Bive  or  Bibe. 

'  For  a  full  account  of  these  beings  see  a  paper  by  Mr.  W.  M.  Hennessey  in 
Vol.  I  of  the  Revue  Celtique,  entitled  "  The  Ancient  Irish  Goddess  of  War". 


54  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Dagda,  whose  name  seems  to  have  meant  the  *'Good 
God".^  The  old  Irish  tract  called  **The  Choice  of 
Names  "  tells  us  that  he  was  a  god  of  the  earth ; 
he  had  a  cauldron  called  '*  The  Undry ",  in  which 
everyone  found  food  in  proportion  to  his  merits,  and 
from  which  none  went  away  unsatisfied.  He  also 
had  a  living  harp;  as  he  played  upon  it,  the  seasons 
came  in  their  order — spring  following  winter,  and 
summer  succeeding  spring,  autumn  coming  after 
summer,  and,  in  its  turn,  giving  place  to  winter.  He 
is  represented  as  of  venerable  aspect  and  of  simple 
mind  and  tastes,  very  fond  of  porridge,  and  a  valiant 
consumer  of  it.  In  an  ancient  tale  we  have  a  de- 
scription of  his  dress.  He  wore  a  brown,  low- 
necked  tunic  which  only  reached  down  to  his  hips, 
and,  over  this,  a  hooded  cape  which  barely  covered 
his  shoulders.  On  his  feet  and  legs  were  horse-hide 
boots,  the  hairy  side  outwards.  He  carried,  or, 
rather,  drew  after  him  on  a  wheel,  an  eight-pronged 
war-club,  so  huge  that  eight  men  would  have  been 
needed  to  carry  it;  and  the  wheel,  as  he  towed  the 
whole  weapon  along,  made  a  track  like  a  territorial 
boundary.^  Ancient  and  gray-headed  as  he  was, 
and  sturdy  porridge-eater,  it  will  be  seen  from  this 
that  he  was  a  formidable  fighter.  He  did  great  deeds 
in  the  battle  between  the  gods  and  the  Fomors,  and, 
on  one  occasion,  is  even  said  to  have  captured  single- 
handed  a  hundred-legged  and  four-headed  monster 
called  Mata,  dragged  him  to  the  **  Stone  of  Benn", 
near  the  Boyne,  and  killed  him  there. 

1  De  Jubainville :  Le  Cycle  Mythologique.     Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  154.    The 
Coir  Anmann,  however,  translates  it  "  Fire  of  God". 
»  The  Second  Battle  qf  Moytura.     Harleian  MS.  5280. 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  55 

The  Dagda's  wife  was  called  Boann.  She  was 
connected  in  legend  with  the  River  Boyne,  to 
which  she  gave  its  name,  and,  indeed,  its  very  exist- 
ence.^ Formerly  there  was  only  a  welP,  shaded  by 
nine  magic  hazel-trees.  These  trees  bore  crimson 
nuts,  and  it  was  the  property  of  the  nuts  that  who- 
ever ate  of  them  immediately  became  possessed  of 
the  knowledge  of  everything  that  was  in  the  world. 
The  story  is,  in  fact,  a  Gaelic  version  of  the  Hebrew 
myth  of  ''the  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  Good  and 
Evil".  One  class  of  creatures  alone  had  this 
privilege — divine  salmon  who  lived  in  the  well,  and 
swallowed  the  nuts  as  they  dropped  from  the  trees 
into  the  water,  and  thus  knew  all  things,  and  appear 
in  legend  as  the  ''Salmons  of  Knowledge".  All 
others,  even  the  highest  gods,  were  forbidden  to 
approach  the  place.  Only  Boann,  with  the  pro- 
verbial woman's  curiosity,  dared  to  disobey  this 
fixed  law.  She  came  towards  the  sacred  well,  but, 
as  she  did  so,  its  waters  rose  up  at  her,  and  drove 
her  away  before  them  in  a  mighty,  rushing  flood. 
She  escaped;  but  the  waters  never  returned.  They 
made  the  Boyne;  and  as  for  the  all-knowing  inhabi- 
tants of  the  well,  they  wandered  disconsolately 
through  the  depths  of  the  river,  looking  in  vain  for 
their  lost  nuts.  One  of  these  salmon  was  afterwards 
eaten  by  the  famous  Finn  mac  Coul,  upon  whom  all 
its  omniscience  descended.^  This  way  of  accounting 
for  the  existence  of  a  river  is  a  favourite  one  in  Irish 
legend.     It  is  told  also  of  the  Shannon,  which  burst. 

*  The  story  is  told  in  the  Book  of  Leinster.  "Now  called  " Trinity  Well". 

•  See  chap,  xiv — "  Finn  and  the  Fenians". 


56  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

like  the  Boyne,  from  an  inviolable  well,  to  pursue 
another  presumptuous  nymph  called  Sinann,  a  grand- 
daughter of  the  sea-god  Ler.^ 

The  Dagda  had  several  children,  the  most  im- 
portant of  whom  are  Brigit,  Angus,  Mider,  Ogma, 
and  Bodb  the  Red.  Of  these,  Brigit  will  be 
already  familiar  to  English  readers  who  know  no- 
thing of  Celtic  myth.  Originally  she  was  a  goddess 
of  fire  and  the  hearth,  as  well  as  of  poetry,  which 
the  Gaels  deemed  an  immaterial,  supersensual  form 
of  flame.  But  the  early  Christianizers  of  Ireland 
adopted  the  pagan  goddess  into  their  roll  of  saint- 
ship,  and,  thus  canonized,  she  obtained  immense 
popularity  as  Saint  Bridget,  or  Bride. ^ 

Angus  was  called  Mac  Oc,  which  means  the  ''  Son 
of  the  Young",  or,  perhaps,  the  *' Young  God". 
This  most  charming  of  the  creations  of  the  Celtic 
mythology  is  represented  as  a  Gaelic  Eros,  an 
eternally  youthful  exponent  of  love  and  beauty. 
Like  his  father,  he  had  a  harp,  but  it  was  of  gold, 
not  oak,  as  the  Dagda  s  was,  and  so  sweet  was  its 
music  that  no  one  could  hear  and  not  follow  it.  His 
kisses  became  birds  which  hovered  invisibly  over 
the  young  men  and  maidens  of  Erin,  whispering 
thoughts  of  love  into  their  ears.  He  is  chiefly 
connected  with  the  banks  of  the  Boyne,  where  he 
had  a  "brugh",  or  fairy  palace;  and  many  stories 
are  told  of  his  exploits  and  adventures. 

Mider,  also  the  hero  of  legends,  would  seem  to 
have    been    a    god   of    the    underworld,    a    Gaelic 

^  Book  of  Leinster.      A  paraphrase  of  the  story  will   be  found  in  O'Curry's 
Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  Vol.  II,  p.  143. 
2  See  chap,  xv— "  The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods  ". 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  57 

Pluto.  As  such,  he  was  connected  with  the  Isle 
of  Falga — a  name  for  what  was  otherwise,  and  still 
is,  called  the  Isle  of  Man — where  he  had  a  strong- 
hold in  which  he  kept  three  wonderful  cows  and 
a  magic  cauldron.  He  was  also  the  owner  of  the 
"  Three  Cranes  of  Denial  and  Churlishness  ",  which 
might  be  described  flippantly  as  personified  ''gentle 
hints  ".  They  stood  beside  his  door,  and  when  any- 
one approached  to  ask  for  hospitality,  the  first  one 
said:  **  Do  not  come!  do  not  come!"  and  the  second 
added:  *' Get  away!  get  away!"  while  the  third 
chimed  in  with:  "Go  past  the  house!  go  past  the 
house !"^  These  three  birds  were,  however,  stolen 
from  Mider  by  Aitherne,  an  avaricious  poet,  to 
whom  they  would  seem  to  have  been  more  appro- 
priate than  to  their  owner,  who  does  noi  otherwise 
appear  as  a  churlish  and  illiberal  deity. ^  On  the 
contrary,  he  is  represented  as  the  victim  of  others, 
who  plundered  him  freely.  The  god  Angus  took 
away  his  wife  Etain,^  while  his  cows,  his  cauldron, 
and  his  beautiful  daughter  Blathnat  were  carried  off 
as  spoil  by  the  heroes  or  demi-gods  who  surrounded 
King  Conchobar  in  the  golden  age  of  Ulster. 

Ogma,  who  appears  to  have  been  also  called 
Cermait,  that  is,  the  ** honey-mouthed",  was  the 
god  of  literature  and  eloquence.  He  married 
Etan,  the  daughter  of  Diancecht,  the  god  of  medi- 
cine, and  had  several  children,  who  play  parts  more 
or  less  prominent  in  the  mythology  of  the  Gaelic 
Celts.      One  of  them   was  called    Tuirenn,   whose 

^  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  331.  ^  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  331. 

3  See  chap,  xi-  "The  Gods  in  Exile". 


58  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

three  sons  murdered  the  father  of  the  sun-god,  and 
were  compelled,  as  expiation,  to  pay  the  greatest  fine 
ever  heard  of — nothing  less  than  the  chief  treasures 
of  the  world.  ^  Another  son,  Cairpr^,  became  the 
professional  bard  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  while 
three  others  reigned  for  a  short  time  over  the  divine 
race.  As  patron  of  literature,  Ogma  was  naturally- 
credited  with  having  been  the  inventor  of  the  famous 
Ogam  alphabet.  This  was  an  indigenous  script  of 
Ireland,  which  spread  afterwards  to  Great  Britain, 
inscriptions  in  ogmic  characters  having  been  found 
in  Scotland,  the  Isle  of  Man,  South  Wales,  Devon- 
shire, and  at  Silchester  in  Hampshire,  the  Roman 
city  of  Calleva  Attrebatum.  It  was  originally  in- 
tended for  inscriptions  upon  upright  pillar-stones  or 
upon  wands,  the  equivalents  for  letters  being  notches 
cut  across,  or  strokes  made  upon  one  of  the  faces  of 
the  angle,  the  alphabet  running  as  follows: 

VOWELS 
*        **        •••      ••••      ••••■ 

A       O         U         E  I 

CONSONANTS 


BLF        S         NHDT        C         OU 


M      G     NG      ST        R  P 

1  See  chap,  viii — "The  Gaelic  Argonauts". 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  59 

When  afterwards  written  in  manuscript,  the  strokes 
were  placed  over,  under,  or  through  a  horizontal 
line,  in  the  manner  above;  and  the  vowels  were 
represented  by  short  lines  instead  of  notches,  as: 


-f 


AGUE         I 

A  good  example  of  an  ogmic  inscription  is  given 
in  Professor  Rhys's  Hibbert  Lectures.  It  comes  from 
a  pillar  on  a  small  promontory  near  Dunmore  Head, 
in  the  west  of  Kerry,  and,  read  horizontally,  reads: 

1 


f ""/  '""    / 


R        C    M    A  QU         I        M    A     QU         I 


/ 


Hill 

ER       C       lASMODOV       I       N       lA 

ERC,  THE  SON  OF  THE  SON  OF  ERCA  (descenda^it  of)  MODOVINIA.* 

The  origin  of  this  alphabet  is  obscure.  Some 
authorities  consider  it  of  great  antiquity,  while  others 
believe  it  entirely  post-Christian.  It  seems,  at  any 
rate,  to  have  been  based  upon,  and  consequently  to 
presuppose  a  knowledge  of,  the  Roman  alphabet. 

Ogma,  besides  being  the  patron  of  literature,  was 
the  champion,  or  professional  strong  man  of  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann.      His  epithet  is  Grianainech, 

^  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  524. 


6o  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

that  is,  the  **  Sunny-faced ",  from  his  radiant  and 
shining  countenance. 

The  last  of  the  Dagda's  more  important  children 
is  Bodb^  the  Red,  who  plays  a  greater  part  in  later 
than  in  earlier  legend.  He  succeeded  his  father  as 
king  of  the  gods.  He  is  chiefly  connected  with 
the  south  of  Ireland,  especially  with  the  Gal  tee 
Mountains,  and  with  Lough  Dearg,  where  he  had 
a  famous  sidh,  or  underground  palace. 

The  Poseidon  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  Pantheon 
was  called  Ler,  but  we  hear  little  of  him  in  com- 
parison with  his  famous  son,  Mananndn,  the  greatest 
and  most  popular  of  his  many  children.  Manannan 
mac  Lir^  was  the  special  patron  of  sailors,  who 
invoked  him  as  ''God  of  Headlands",  and  of  mer- 
chants, who  claimed  him  as  the  first  of  their  guild. 
His  favourite  haunts  were  the  Isle  of  Man,  to  which 
he  gave  his  name,  and  the  Isle  of  Arran,  in  the 
Firth  of  Clyde,  where  he  had  a  palace  called  *'  Emhain 
of  the  Apple-Trees  ".  He  had  many  famous  weapons 
— two  spears  called  ''Yellow  Shaft"  and  "Red 
Javelin",  a  sword  called  "The  Retaliator",  which 
never  failed  to  slay,  as  well  as  two  others  known  as 
the  "  Great  Fury  "and  the  "  Little  Fury  ".  He  had 
a  boat  called  "Wave-sweeper",  which  propelled  and 
guided  itself  wherever  its  owner  wished,  and  a  horse 
called  "  Splendid  Mane ",  which  was  swifter  than 
the  spring  wind,  and  travelled  equally  fast  on  land 
or  over  the  waves  of  the  sea.  No  weapon  could 
hurt  him  through  his  magic  mail  and  breast-plate, 
and  on  his  helmet  there  shone  two  magic  jewels 

*  Pronounced  Bme.  '  L6r — genitive  Lir. 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  6i 

bright  as  the  sun.  He  endowed  the  gods  with 
the  mantle  which  made  them  invisible  at  will,  and 
he  fed  them  from  his  pigs,  which,  like  the  boar 
Saehrimnir,  in  the  Norse  Valhalla,  renewed  them- 
selves as  soon  as  they  had  been  eaten.  Of  these, 
no  doubt,  he  made  his  *' Feast  of  Age",  the  banquet 
at  which  those  who  ate  never  grew  old.  Thus  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu  preserved  their  im- 
mortal youth,  while  the  ale  of  Goibniu  the  Smith- 
God  bestowed  invulnerability  upon  them.  It  is 
fitting  that  Mananndn  himself  should  have  been 
blessed  beyond  all  the  other  gods  with  inexhaustible 
life;  up  to  the  latest  days  of  Irish  heroic  literature 
his  luminous  figure  shines  prominent,  nor  is  it  even 
yet  wholly  forgotten. 

Goibniu,  the  Gaelic  Hephaestus,  who  made  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu  invulnerable  with  his 
magic  drink,  was  also  the  forger  of  their  weapons. 
It  was  he  who,  helped  by  Luchtaind,  the  divine 
carpenter,  and  Credne,  the  divine  bronze  -  worker, 
made  the  armoury  with  which  the  Tuatha  D6  Dan- 
ann  conquered  the  Fomors.  Equally  useful  to 
tliem  was  Diancecht,  the  god  of  medicine.^  It 
was  he  who  once  saved  Ireland,  and  was  indirectly 
the  cause  of  the  name  of  the  River  Barrow.  The 
Morrfgii,  the  heaven -god's  fierce  wife,  had  borne 
a  son  of  such  terrible  aspect  that  the  physician  of 
the  gods,  foreseeing  danger,  counselled  that  he 
should  be  destroyed  in  his  infancy.  This  was  done; 
and  Diancecht  opened  the  infant's  heart,  and  found 

^  Pronounced  Diankei.     His  name  is  explained,  both  in  the  Choice  of  Names 
and  in  Cormac's  Glossary,  as  meaning  "God  of  Health ". 


62  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

within  it  three  serpents,  capable,  when  they  grew  to 
full  size,  of  depopulating  Ireland.  He  lost  no  time 
in  destroying  these  serpents  also,  and  burning  them 
into  ashes,  to  avoid  the  evil  which  even  their  dead 
bodies  might  do.  More  than  this,  he  flung  the 
ashes  into  the  nearest  river,  for  he  feared  that  there 
might  be  danger  even  in  them;  and,  indeed,  so 
venomous  were  they  that  the  river  boiled  up  and 
slew  every  living  creature  in  it,  and  therefore  has 
been  called  '*  Barrow  "  (boiling)  ever  since.^ 

Diancecht  had  several  children,  of  whom  two  fol- 
lowed their  father's  profession.  These  were  Miach 
and  his  sister  Airmid.  There  were  also  another 
daughter,  Etan,  who  married  Cermait  (or  Ogma), 
and  three  other  sons  called  Cian,  Cethe,  and  Cu. 
Cian  married  Ethniu,  the  daughter  of  Balor  the 
Fomor,  and  they  had  a  son  who  was  the  crowning 
glory  of  the  Gaelic  Pantheon — its  Apollo,  the  Sun- 
God, — Lugh^,  called  Lamhfada^,  which  means  the 
*' Long-handed",  or  the  '* Far-shooter".  It  was  not, 
however,  with  the  bow,  like  the  Apollo  of  the 
Greeks,  but  with  the  rod-sling  that  Lugh  per- 
formed his  feats;  his  worshippers  sometimes  saw 
the  terrible  weapon  in  the  sky  as  a  rainbow,  and 
the  Milky  Way  was  called  "■  Lugh's  Chain  ".  He 
also  had  a  magic  spear,  which,  unlike  the  rod-sling, 
he  had  no  need  to  wield,  himself;  for  it  was  alive, 
and  thirsted  so  for  blood  that  only  by  steeping  its 
head  in  a  sleeping-draught  of  pounded  poppy  leaves 
could  it  be  kept  at  rest.     When  battle  was  near,  it 

1  Standish  O'Grady :    The  Story  of  Ireland,  p.  17. 

'  Pronounced  Luga  or  Loo,  '  Pronounced  Lavdda 


The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  63 

was  drawn  out ;  then  it  roared,  and  struggled  against 
its  thongs;  fire  flashed  fi-om  it;  and,  once  slipped 
from  the  leash,  it  tore  through  and  through  the 
ranks  of  the  enemy,  never  tired  of  slaying.  Another 
of  his  possessions  was  a  magic  hound  which  an 
ancient  poem,^  attributed  to  the  Fenian  hero,  Caoilte, 
calls — 

"  That  hound  of  mightiest  deeds, 
Which  was  irresistible  in  hardness  of  combat, 
Was  better  than  wealth  ever  known, 
A  ball  of  fire  every  night. 

"  Other  virtues  had  that  beautiful  hound 
(Better  this  property  than  any  other  property), 
Mead  or  wine  would  grow  of  it, 
Should  it  bathe  in  spring  water." 

This  marvellous  hound,  as  well  as  the  marvellous 
spear,  and  the  indestructible  pigs  of  Mananndn  were 
obtained  for  Lugh  by  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  as  part  of 
the  blood-fine  he  exacted  from  them  for  the  murder 
of  his  father  Cian.^  A  hardly  less  curious  story  is 
that  which  tells  how  Lugh  got  his  name  of  the 
loldanach,  or  the  ''  Master  of  All  Arts  ".^ 

These  are,  of  course,  only  the  greater  deities  of 
the  Gaelic  Pantheon,  their  divinities  which  answered 
to  such  Hellenic  figures  as  Demeter,  Zeus,  Here, 
Cronos,  Athena,  Eros,  Hades,  Hermes,  Hephaestus, 
Aesculapius,  and  Apollo.  All  of  them  had  many 
descendants,  some  of  whom  play  prominent  parts 

1  Translated  by  O' Curry  in  Atlantis,  Vol  III,  from  the  Book  of  Lismore. 
'  Chap.  VIII — "The  Gaelic  Argonauts". 
3  Chap.  VII—"  The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God  ". 


64  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

in  the  heroic  cycles  of  the  **  Red  Branch  of  Ulster  " 
and  of  the  "Fenians".  In  addition  to  these,  there 
must  have  been  a  multitude  of  lesser  gods  who 
stood  in  much  the  same  relation  to  the  great  gods 
as  the  rank  and  file  of  tribesmen  did  to  their  chiefs. 
Most  of  these  were  probably  local  deities  of  the 
various  clans — the  gods  their  heroes  swore  by.  But 
it  is  also  possible  that  some  may  have  been  divini- 
ties of  the  aboriginal  race.  Professor  Rhys  thinks 
that  he  can  still  trace  a  few  of  such  Iberian  gods  by 
name,  as  Net,  Ri  or  Roi,  Corb,  and  Beth.^  But 
they  play  no  recognizable  part  in  the  stories  of  the 
Gaelic  gods. 

^  Rhys:  Celtic  Britain,  chap,  vii. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE    GODS    ARRIVE 

The  people  of  the  goddess  Danu  were  not  the 
first  divine  inhabitants  of  Ireland.  Others  had  been 
before  them,  dwellers  in  ''the  dark  backward  and 
abysm  of  time  ".  In  this  the  Celtic  mythology  re- 
sembles those  of  other  nations,  in  almost  all  of  which 
we  find  an  old,  dim  realm  of  gods  standing  behind 
the  reigning  Pantheon.  Such  were  Cronos  and  the 
Titans,  dispossessed  by  the  Zeus  who  seemed,  even 
to  Hesiod,  something  of  a  parvenu  deity.  Gaelic 
tradition  recognizes  two  divine  dynasties  anterior  to 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann.  The  first  of  these  was 
called  *'  The  Race  of  Partholon ".  Its  head  and 
leader  came — as  all  gods  and  men  came,  according 
to  Celtic  ideas — from  the  Other  World,  and  landed 
in  Ireland  with  a  retinue  of  twenty-four  males  and 
twenty-four  females  upon  the  first  of  May,  the  day 
called  ''  Beltaine  ",  sacred  to  Bil6,  the  god  of  death. 
At  this  remote  time,  Ireland  consisted  of  only  one 
treeless,  grassless  plain,  watered  by  three  lakes  and 
nine  rivers.  But,  as  the  race  of  Partholon  increased, 
the  land  stretched,  or  widened,  under  them — some 
said  miraculously,  and  others,  by  the  labours  of 
Partholon's  people.  At  any  rate,  during  the  three 
hundred  years  they  dwelt  there,  it  grew  from  one 

( B  219 )  66  £ 


66  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

plain  to  four,  and  acquired  seven  new  lakes;  which 
was  fortunate,  for  the  race  of  Partholon  increased 
from  forty-eight  members  to  five  thousand,  in  spite 
of  battles  with  the  Fomors. 

These  would  seem  to  have  been  inevitable. 
Whatever  gods  ruled,  they  found  themselves  in 
eternal  opposition  to  the  not-gods — the  powers  of 
darkness,  winter,  evil,  and  death.  The  race  of 
Partholon  warred  against  them  with  success.  At 
the  Plain  of  Ith,  Partholon  defeated  their  leader, 
a  gigantic  demon  called  Cichol  the  Footless,  and 
dispersed  his  deformed  and  monstrous  host.  After 
this  there  was  quiet  for  three  hundred  years.  Then 
— upon  the  same  fatal  first  of  May — there  began  a 
mysterious  epidemic,  which  lasted  a  week,  and  de- 
stroyed them  all.  In  premonition  of  their  end,  they 
foregathered  upon  the  original,  first-created  plain — 
then  called  Sen  Mag,  or  the  ''  Old  Plain  ", — so  that 
those  who  survived  might  the  more  easily  bury 
those  that  died.  Their  funeral-place  is  still  marked 
by  a  mound  near  Dublin,  called  **  Tallaght "  in  the 
maps,  but  formerly  known  as  Tamlecht  Muintre 
Partholain,  the  **  Plague  -  grave  of  Partholon  s 
People ".  This  would  seem  to  have  been  a  de- 
velopment of  the  very  oldest  form  of  the  legend — 
which  knew  nothing  of  a  plague,  but  merely  repre- 
sented the  people  of  Partholon  as  having  returned, 
after  their  sojourn  in  Ireland,  to  the  other  world, 
whence  they  came — and  is  probably  due  to  the 
gradual  euhemerization  of  the  ancient  gods  into 
ancient  men. 

Following  the  race  of  Partholon,  came  the  race 


The   Gods  Arrive  67 

of  Nemed,  which  carried  on  the  work  and  traditions 
of  its  forerunner.  During  its  time,  Ireland  again 
enlarged  herself,  to  the  extent  of  twelve  new  plains 
and  four  more  lakes.  Like  the  people  of  Par- 
tholon,  the  race  of  Nemed  struggled  with  the 
Fomors,  and  defeated  them  in  four  consecutive 
battles.  Then  Nemed  died,  with  two  thousand  of 
his  people,  from  an  epidemic,  and  the  remnant,  left 
without  their  leader,  were  terribly  oppressed  by  the 
Fomors.  Two  Fomorian  kings  —  More,  son  of 
Dela,  and  Conann,  son  of  Febar — had  built  a  tower 
of  glass  upon  Tory  Island,  always  their  chief  strong- 
hold, and  where  stories  of  them  still  linger,  and 
from  this  vantage-point  they  dictated  a  tax  which 
recalls  that  paid,  in  Greek  story,  to  the  Cretan 
Minotaur.  Two-thirds  of  the  children  born  to  the 
race  of  Nemed  during  the  year  were  to  be  delivered 
up  on  each  day  of  Samhain.  Goaded  by  this  to 
a  last  desperate  effort,  the  survivors  of  Nemed's 
people  attacked  the  tower,  and  took  it,  Conann 
perishing  in  the  struggle.  But  their  triumph  was 
short.  More,  the  other  king,  collected  his  forces, 
and  inflicted  such  a  slaughter  upon  the  people  of 
Nemed  that,  out  of  the  sixteen  thousand  who  had 
assembled  for  the  storming  of  the  tower,  only  thirty 
survived.  And  these  returned  whence  they  came, 
or  died — the  two  acts  being,  mythologically  speak- 
ing, the  same.^ 

One  cannot  help  seeing  a  good  deal  of  similarity 
between  the  stories  of  these  two  mythical  invasions 
of  Ireland.     Especially  noticeable  is  the  account  of 

*  De  Jubainville:  Cycle  Mythologique,  chap.  v. 


68  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  epidemic  which  destroyed  all  Partholon's  people 
and  nearly  all  of  Nemed's.  Hence  it  has  been  held 
that  the  two  legends  are  duplicates,  and  that  there 
was  at  first  only  one,  which  has  been  adapted  some- 
what differently  by  two  races,  the  Iberians  and  the 
Gaels.  Professor  Rhys  considers^  the  account  of 
Nemed  to  have  been  the  original  Celtic  one,  and 
the  Partholon  story,  the  version  of  it  which  the 
native  races  made  to  please  themselves.  The  name 
"  Partholon  ",  with  its  initial  p,  is  entirely  foreign  to 
the  genius  of  Gaelic  speech.  Moreover,  Partholon 
himself  is  given,  by  the  early  chroniclers,  ancestors 
whose  decidedly  non-Aryan  names  reappear  after- 
wards as  the  names  of  Fir  Bolg  chiefs.  Nemed  was 
later  than  Partholon  in  Ireland,  as  the  Gaels,  or  "  Mi- 
lesians", were  later  than  the  Iberians,  or  '*Fir  Bolgs". 
These  ''  Fir  Bolgs "  are  found  in  myth  as  the 
next  colonizers  of  Ireland.  Varying  traditions  say 
that  they  came  from  Greece,  or  from  ''  Spain  " — 
which  was  a  post  -  Christian  euphemism  for  the 
Celtic  Hades.^  They  consisted  of  three  tribes, 
called  the  ''  Fir  Domnann  "  or  *'  Men  of  Domnu  ", 
the  ''  Fir  Gaillion  "  or  *'  Men  of  Gaillion  ",  and  the 
''  Fir  Bolg  "  or  ''  Men  of  Bolg  ";  but,  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  the  first-named  tribe  was  the  most  im- 
portant, they  are  usually  called  collectively  after 
the  last.  Curious  stories  are  told  of  their  life  in 
Greece,  and  how  they  came  to  Ireland;  but  these 
are  somewhat  factitious,  and  obviously  do  not  be- 
long to  the  earliest  tradition. 

1  Rhys:  "The  Mythographical  Treatment  of  Celtic  Ethnology",  Scottish  Review, 
Oct.  1890. 
'  De  Jubainville:  Cycle  Mythologique,  chap.  v.    Rhys:  Hibbert Lectures,  pp.  go,  91. 


The  Gods  Arrive  69 

In  the  time  of  their  domination  they  had,  we  are 
told,  partitioned  Ireland  among  them:  the  Fir  Bolg 
held  Ulster;  the  Fir  Domnann,  divided  into  three 
kingdoms,  occupied  North  Munster,  South  Munster, 
and  Connaught;  while  the  Fir  Gaillion  owned  Lein- 
ster.  These  five  provinces  met  at  a  hill  then  called 
''Balor  s  Hill",  but  afterwards  the  ''Hill  of  Uisnech". 
It  is  near  Rathconrath,  in  the  county  of  West 
Meath,  and  was  believed,  in  early  times,  to  mark 
the  exact  centre  of  Ireland.  They  held  the  country 
from  the  departure  of  the  people  of  Nemed  to  the 
coming  of  the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu,  and  dur- 
ing this  period  they  had  nine  supreme  kings.  At 
the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  gods,  their  king's  name 
was  Eochaid^  son  of  Ere,  surnamed  ''  The  Proud  ". 

We  have  practically  no  other  details  regarding 
their  life  in  Ireland.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that 
they  were  not  really  gods,  but  the  pre- Aryan  race 
which  the  Gaels,  when  they  landed  in  Ireland,  found 
already  in  occupation.  There  are  many  instances 
of  peoples  at  a  certain  stage  of  culture  regarding 
tribes  in  a  somewhat  lower  one  as  semi-divine,  or, 
rather,  half- diabolical.^  The  suspicion  and  fear 
with  which  the  early  Celts  must  have  regarded  the 
savage  aborigines  made  them  seem  ''larger  than 
human  ".  They  feared  them  for  the  weird  magical 
rites  which  they  practised  in  their  inaccessible  forts 
among  the  hills,  amid  storms  and  mountain  mists. 
The  Gaels,  who  held  themselves  to  be  the  children 
of  light,  deemed  these  "dark  Iberians"  children  of 

^  Pronounced  Ecca  or  Eohee. 

'Gomme:  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  chap.  Ill — "The  Mythic  Influence  of  a  Con. 
quered  Race  ". 


70  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  dark.  Their  tribal  names  seem  to  have  been, 
in  several  instances,  founded  upon  this  idea.  There 
were  the  Corca-Oidce  (''People  of  Darkness")  and 
the  Corca-Duibhne  (''People  of  the  Night").  The 
territory  of  the  western  tribe  of  the  Hi  Dorchaide 
("  Sons  of  Dark  ")  was  called  the  "  Night  Country  ".^ 
The  Celts,  who  held  their  own  gods  to  have  preceded 
them  into  Ireland,  would  not  believe  that  even  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann  could  have  wrested  the  land 
from  these  magic-skilled   Iberians  without  battle. 

They  seem  also  to  have  been  considered  as  in 
some  way  connected  with  the  Fomors.  Just  as 
the  largest  Iberian  tribe  was  called  the  "Men  of 
Domnu  ",  so  the  Fomors  were  called  the  "  Gods  of 
Domnu  ",  and  Indech,  one  of  their  kings,  is  a  "son 
of  Domnu  ".  Thus  eternal  battle  between  the  gods, 
children  of  Danu,  and  the  giants,  children  of  Domnu, 
would  reflect,  in  the  supernatural  world,  the  per- 
petual warfare  between  invading  Celt  and  resisting 
Iberian.  It  is  shadowed,  too,  in  the  later  heroic 
cycle.  The  champions  of  Ulster,  Aryans  and  Gaels 
par  excellence,  have  no  such  bitter  enemies  as  the 
Fir  Domnann  of  Munster  and  the  Fir  Gaillion  of 
Leinster.  A  few  scholars  would  even  see  in  the 
later  death-struggle  between  the  High  King  of 
Ireland  and  his  rebellious  Fenians  the  last  historic 
or  mythological  adumbration  of  racial  war.^ 

The  enemies  alike  of  Fir  Bolg  and  Fomor,  the 

^  Elton :  Origins  of  English  History^  note  to  p.  136. 

'  It  has  been  contended  that  the  Fenians  were  originally  the  gods  or  heroes  of  an 
aboriginal  people  in  Ireland,  the  myths  about  them  representing  the  pre-Celtic  and 
pre- Aryan  ideal,  as  the  sagas  of  the  Red  Branch  of  Ulster  embodied  that  of  the 
Celtic  Aryans.  The  question,  however,  is  as  yet  far  from  being  satisfactorily 
solved. 


The  Gods  Arrive  71 

Tuatha  D6  Danann,  gods  of  the  Gaels,  were  the 
next  to  arrive.  What  is  probably  the  earliest 
account  tells  us  that  they  came  from  the  sky.  Later 
versions,  however,  give  them  a  habitation  upon 
earth — some  say  in  the  north,  others  in  the  ''southern 
isles  of  the  world  ".  They  had  dwelt  in  four  mythi- 
cal cities  called  Findias,  Gorias,  Murias,  and  Falias, 
where  they  had  learned  poetry  and  magic — to  the 
primitive  mind  two  not  very  dissimilar  things — and 
whence  they  had  brought  to  Ireland  their  four  chief 
treasures.  From  Findias  came  Nuada's  sword, 
from  whose  stroke  no  one  ever  escaped  or  re- 
covered; from  Gorias,  Lughs  terrible  lance;  from 
Murias,  the  Dagda's  cauldron;  and  from  Falias,  the 
Stone  of  F41,  better  known  as  the  "■  Stone  of  Des- 
tiny ",  which  afterwards  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
early  kings  of  Ireland.  According  to  legend,  it  had 
the  magic  property  of  uttering  a  human  cry  when 
touched  by  the  rightful  King  of  Erin.  Some  have 
recognized  in  this  marvellous  stone  the  same  rude 
block  which  Edward  I  brought  from  Scone  in  the 
year  1300,  and  placed  in  Westminster  Abbey,  where 
it  now  forms  part  of  the  Coronation  Chair.  It  is  a 
curious  fact  that,  while  Scottish  legend  asserts  this 
stone  to  have  come  to  Scotland  from  Ireland,  Irish 
legend  should  also  declare  that  it  was  taken  from 
Ireland  to  Scotland.  This  would  sound  like  con- 
clusive evidence,  but  it  is  none  the  less  held  by 
leading  modern  archaeologists — including  Dr.  W.  F. 
Skene,  who  has  published  a  monograph  on  the  sub- 
ject^— that  the   Stone  of  Scone  and  the  Stone  of 

^  The  Coronation  Stone,  by  William  Forbes  Skene, 


72  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Tara  were  never  the  same.  Dr.  Petrie  identifies 
the  real  Lia  Fdil  with  a  stone  which  has  always 
remained  in  Ireland,  and  which  was  removed  from 
its  original  position  on  Tara  Hill,  in  1798,  to  mark 
the  tomb  of  the  rebels  buried  close  by  under  a 
mound  now  known  as  ''  the  Croppies'  grave  ".^ 

Whether  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  came  from 
earth  or  heaven,  they  landed  in  a  dense  cloud  upon 
the  coast  of  Ireland  on  the  mystic  first  of  May 
without  having  been  opposed,  or  even  noticed  by 
the  people  whom  it  will  be  convenient  to  follow  the 
manuscript  authorities  in  calling  the  "Fir  Bolgs".^ 
That  those  might  still  be  ignorant  of  their  coming, 
the  Morrigu,  helped  by  Badb  and  Macha,  made  use 
of  the  magic  they  had  learned  in  Findias,  Gorias, 
Murias,  and  Falias.  They  spread  "  druidically- 
formed  showers  and  fog-sustaining  shower-clouds" 
over  the  country,  and  caused  the  air  to  pour  down 
fire  and  blood  upon  the  Fir  Bolgs,  so  that  they  were 
obliged  to  shelter  themselves  for  three  days  and 
three  nights.  But  the  Fir  Bolgs  had  druids  of  their 
own,  and,  in  the  end,  they  put  a  stop  to  these  en- 
chantments by  counter-spells,  and  the  air  grew  clear 
again. 

The  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  advancing  westward, 
had  reached  a  place  called  the  ''  Plain  of  the  Sea  ", 
in  Leinster,  when  the  two  armies  met.  Each  sent 
out  a  warrior  to  parley.     The  two  adversaries  ap- 

*  See  History  and  Antiquities  of  Tara  Hill. 

*  Our  authorities  for  the  details  of  this  war  between  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  and 
the  Fir  Bolgs  are  the  opening  verses  of  the  Harleian  MS.  5280,  as  translated  by 
Stokes  and  De  Jubainville,  and  Eugene  O'Curry's  translations,  in  his  MS.  Materials 
of  Ancient  Irish  History  and  his  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  from 
a  manuscript  preserved  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin 


The   Gods  Arrive  73 

preached  each  other  cautiously,  their  eyes  peeping 
over  the  tops  of  their  shields.  Then,  coming 
gradually  nearer,  they  spoke  to  one  another,  and  the 
desire  to  examine  each  other's  weapons  made  them 
almost  friends. 

The  envoy  of  the  Fir  Bolgs  looked  with  wonder 
at  the  *'  beautifully-shaped,  thin,  slender,  long,  sharp- 
pointed  spears  "  of  the  warrior  of  the  Tuatha  D6 
Danann,  while  the  ambassador  of  the  tribe  of  the 
goddess  Danu  was  not  less  impressed  by  the  lances 
of  the  Fir  Bolgs,  which  were  *' heavy,  thick,  point- 
less, but  sharply-rounded ".  They  agreed  to  ex- 
change weapons,  so  that  each  side  might,  by  an 
examination  of  them,  be  able  to  come  to  some 
opinion  as  to  its  opponent's  strength.  Before  part- 
ing, the  envoy  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  offered 
the  Fir  Bolgs,  through  their  representative,  peace, 
with  a  division  of  the  country  into  two  equal  halves. 

The  Fir  Bolg  envoy  advised  his  people  to  accept 
this  offer.  But  their  king,  Eochaid,  son  of  Ere, 
would  not.  "If  we  once  give  these  people  half," 
he  said,   **they  will  soon  have  the  whole." 

The  people  of  the  goddess  Danu  were,  on  the 
other  hand,  very  much  impressed  by  the  sight  of 
the  Fir  Bolgs'  weapons.  They  decided  to  secure  a 
more  advantageous  position,  and,  retreating  farther 
west  into  Connaught,  to  a  plain  then  called  Nia,  but 
now  Moytura,  near  the  present  village  of  Cong, 
they  drew  up  their  line  at  its  extreme  end,  in  front 
of  the  pass  of  Balgatan^  which  offered  a  retreat  in 
case  of  defeat. 

*  Now  called  Benlevi. 


74  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

The  Fir  Bolgs  followed  them,  and  encamped  on 
the  nearer  side  of  the  plain.  Then  Nuada,  King  of 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  sent  an  ambassador  offer- 
ing the  same  terms  as  before.  Again  the  Fir  Bolgs 
declined  them. 

''Then  when",  asked  the  envoy,  **do  you  intend 
to  give  battle?" 

*' We  must  have  a  truce,"  they  said,  ''for  we 
want  time  to  repair  our  armour,  burnish  our  helmets, 
and  sharpen  our  swords.  Besides,  we  must  have 
spears  like  yours  made  for  us,  and  you  must  have 
spears  like  ours  made  for  you." 

The  result  of  this  chivalrous,  but,  to  modern 
ideas,  amazing,  parley  was  that  a  truce  of  one  hun- 
dred and  five  days  was  agreed  upon. 

It  was  on  Midsummer  Day  that  the  opposing 
armies  at  last  met.  The  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  appeared  in  "a  flaming  line",  wielding  their 
"  red-bordered,  speckled,  and  firm  shields  ".  Oppo- 
site to  them  were  ranged  the  Fir  Bolgs,  "sparkling, 
brilliant,  and  flaming,  with  their  swords,  spears, 
blades,  and  trowel-spears  ".  The  proceedings  began 
with  a  kind  of  deadly  hurley-match,  in  which  thrice 
nine  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  played  the  same 
number  of  the  Fir  Bolgs,  and  were  defeated  and 
killed.  Then  followed  another  parley,  to  decide 
how  the  battle  should  be  carried  on,  whether  there 
should  be  fighting  every  day  or  only  on  every 
second  day.  Moreover,  Nuada  obtained  from 
Eochaid  an  assurance  that  the  battles  should  always 
be  fought  with  equal  numbers,  although  this  was, 
we  are  told,    "  very  disagreeable  to  the   Fir   Bolg 


The  Gods  Arrive  75 

king,  because  he  had  largely  the  advantage  in  the 
numbers^  of  his  army  ".  Then  warfare  recommenced 
with  a  series  of  single  combats,  like  those  of  the 
Greeks  and  Trojans  in  the  *'  Iliad  ".  At  the  end  of 
each  day  the  conquerors  on  both  sides  went  back  to 
their  camps,  and  were  refreshed  by  being  bathed  in 
healing  baths  of  medicinal  herbs. 

So  the  fight  went  on  for  four  days,  with  terrible 
slaughter  upon  each  side.  A  Fir  Bolg  champion 
called  Sreng  fought  in  single  combat  with  Nuada, 
the  King  of  the  Gods,  and  shore  off  his  hand  and 
half  his  shield  with  one  terrific  blow.  Eochaid, 
the  King  of  the  Fir  Bolgs,  was  even  less  fortunate 
than  Nuada;  for  he  lost  his  life.  Suffering  terribly 
from  thirst,  he  went,  with  a  hundred  of  his  men, 
to  look  for  water,  and  was  followed,  and  pursued 
as  far  as  the  strand  of  Ballysadare,  in  Sligo. 
Here  he  turned  to  bay,  but  was  killed,  his  grave 
being  still  marked  by  a  tumulus.  The  Fir  Bolgs, 
reduced  at  last  to  three  hundred  men,  demanded 
single  combat  until  all  upon  one  side  were  slain. 
But,  sooner  than  consent  to  this,  the  Tuatha  D6 
Danann  offered  them  a  fifth  part  of  Ireland,  which- 
ever province  they  might  choose.  They  agreed, 
and  chose  Connaught,  ever  afterwards  their  especial 
home,  and  where,  until  the  middle  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  men  were  still  found  tracing  their 
descent  from  Sreng. 

The  whole  story  has  a  singularly  historical,  curi- 
ously unmythological  air  about  it,  which  contrasts 
strangely  with  the  account  of  the  other  battle  of  the 
same  name  which  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  waged 


76  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

afterwards  with  the  Fomors.  The  neighbourhood 
of  Cong  still  preserves  both  relics  and  traditions  of 
the  fight.  Upon  the  plain  of  ''  Southern  Moytura" 
(as  it  is  called,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  ''  Northern 
Moytura "  of  the  second  battle)  are  many  circles 
and  tumuli.  These  circles  are  especially  numerous 
near  the  village  itself;  and  it  is  said  that  there  were 
formerly  others,  which  have  been  used  for  making 
walls  and  dykes.  Large  cairns  of  stones,  too,  are 
scattered  over  what  was  certainly  once  the  scene  of 
a  great  battle.^  These  various  prehistoric  monu- 
ments each  have  their  still  -  told  story ;  and  Sir 
William  Wilde,  as  he  relates  in  his  Lough  Corrib^ 
was  so  impressed  by  the  unexpected  agreement 
between  the  details  of  the  legendary  battle,  as  he 
read  them  in  the  ancient  manuscript,  and  the  tra- 
ditions still  attaching  to  the  mounds,  circles,  and 
cairns,  that  he  tells  us  he  could  not  help  coming  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  account  was  absolutely  his- 
torical. Certainly  the  coincidences  are  curious. 
His  opinion  was  that  the  *'Fir  Bolgs"  were  a  colony 
of  Belgae,  and  that  the  "  Tuatha  De  Danann  "  were 
Danes.  But  the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu  are 
too  obviously  mythical  to  make  it  worth  while  to 
seek  any  standing-ground  for  them  in  the  world  of 
reality.  In  their  superhuman  attributes,  they  are 
quite  different  from  the  Fir  Bolgs.  In  the  epical 
cycle  it  is  made  as  clear  that  the  Tuatha  De  Dan- 
ann are  divine  beings  as  it  is  that  the  Fir  Bolg,  the 
Fir  Domnann,  and  the  Fir  Gaillion  stand  on  exactly 

*  See  Dr.  James  Fergusson:  Rude  Stone  Monuments,  pp.  177-180, 

'^  Lough  Corrib,  Its  Shores  and  Islands^  by  Sir  William  R.  Wilde,  chap,  viil 


The   Gods  Arrive  77 

the  same  footing  as  the  men  of  Ulster.  Later 
history  records  by  what  Milesian  kings  and  on  what 
terms  of  rack-rent  the  three  tribes  were  allowed 
settlements  in  other  parts  of  Ireland  than  their 
native  Connaught.  They  appear  in  ancient,  medi- 
aeval, and  almost  modern  chronicles  as  the  old  race 
of  the  land.  The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  whole 
story  of  the  war  between  the  gods  and  the  Fir 
Bolgs  is  an  invention  of  comparatively  late  times. 
In  the  earliest  documents  there  is  only  one  battle  of 
Moytura,  fought  between  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  and  the  Fomors.  The  idea  of  doubling  it 
seems  to  date  from  after  the  eleventh  century;^  and 
its  inventor  may  very  well  have  used  the  legends 
concerning  this  battle  -  field,  where  two  unknown 
armies  had  fought  in  days  gone  by,  in  compiling 
his  story.  It  never  belonged  to  the  same  genuine 
mythological  stratum  as  the  legend  of  the  original 
battle  fought  by  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  the  gods 
of  the  Gaels,  against  the  Fomors,  the  gods  of  the 
Iberians. 

*  De  Jubainville :  Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais,  p.  156. 


CHAPTER   VII 

THE    RISE    OF    THE    SUN-GOD^ 

It  was  as  a  result  of  the  loss  of  his  hand  in  this 
battle  with  the  Fir  Boigs  that  Nuada  got  his  name 
oi  Argetldm,  that  is,  the  ''Silver  Handed".  For 
Diancecht,  the  physician  of  the  Tuatha  Y)€  Danann, 
made  him  an  artificial  hand  of  silver,  so  skilfully 
that  it  moved  in  all  its  joints,  and  was  as  strong  and 
supple  as  a  real  one.  But,  good  as  it  was  of  its 
sort,  it  was  a  blemish;  and,  according  to  Celtic  cus- 
tom, no  maimed  person  could  sit  upon  the  throne. 
Nuada  was  deposed;  and  the  Tuatha  De  Danann 
went  into  council  to  appoint  a  new  king. 

They  agreed  that  it  would  be  a  politic  thing  for 
them  to  conciliate  the  Fomors,  the  giants  of  the 
sea,  and  make  an  alliance  with  them.  So  they  sent 
a  message  to  Bress,  the  son  of  the  Fomorian  king, 
Elathan,  asking  him  to  come  and  rule  over  them. 
Bress  accepted  this  offer;  and  they  made  a  marriage 
between  him  and  Brigit,  the  daughter  of  the  Dagda. 
At  the  same  time,  Cian^  the  son  of  Diancecht,  the 
physician    of    the    Tuatha    D6    Danann,    married 

1  The  principal  sources  of  information  for  this  chapter  are  the  Harleian  MS.  5280 
entitled  Tke  Second  Battle  of  Moytura,  of  which  translations  have  been  made 
by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes  in  the  Revue  Celtique  and  M.  de  Jubainville  in  his  L Epopie 
Celtique  en  Irlande,  and  Eugene  O'Curry's  translation  in  Vol.  IV.  of  Atlantis  of 
the  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Tuirenn.  2  Pronounced  Kian. 

78 


The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God  79 

Ethniu,  the  daughter  of  the  Fomor,  Balor.  Then 
Bress  was  made  king,  and  endowed  with  lands  and 
a  palace;  and  he,  on  his  part,  gave  hostages  that  he 
would  abdicate  if  his  rule  ever  became  unpleasing  to 
those  who  had  elected  him. 

But,  in  spite  of  all  his  fair  promises,  Bress,  who 
belonged  in  heart  to  his  own  fierce  people,  began  to 
oppress  his  subjects  with  excessive  taxes.  He  put 
a  tax  upon  every  hearth,  upon  every  kneading- 
trough,  and  upon  every  quern,  as  well  as  a  poll-tax 
of  an  ounce  of  gold  upon  every  member  of  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann.  By  a  crafty  trick,  too,  he 
obtained  the  milk  of  all  their  cattle.  He  asked  at 
first  only  for  the  produce  of  any  cows  which  hap- 
pened to  be  brown  and  hairless,  and  the  people  of 
the  goddess  Danu  granted  him  this  cheerfully. 
But  Bress  passed  all  the  cattle  in  Ireland  between 
two  fires,  so  that  their  hair  was  singed  off,  and  thus 
obtained  the  monopoly  of  the  main  source  of  food. 
To  earn  a  livelihood,  all  the  gods,  even  the  greatest, 
were  now  forced  to  labour  for  him.  Oofma,  their 
champion,  was  sent  out  to  collect  firewood,  while 
the  Dagda  was  put  to  work  building  forts  and 
castles. 

One  day,  when  the  Dagda  was  at  his  task,  his 
son,  Angus,  came  to  him.  *'  You  have  nearly 
finished  that  castle,"  he  said.  ''What  reward  do 
you  intend  to  ask  from  Bress  when  it  is  done?" 
The  Dagda  replied  that  he  had  not  yet  thought  of 
it.  "  Let  me  give  you  some  advice,"  said  Angus. 
''  Ask  Bress  to  have  all  the  cattle  in  Ireland  gathered 
together  upon  a  plain,  so  that  you  can  pick  out  one 


8o  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

for  yourself.  He  will  consent  to  that.  Then  choose 
the  black-maned  heifer  called  '  Ocean  '." 

The  Dagda  finished  building  the  fort,  and  then 
went  to  Bress  for  his  reward.  ''  What  will  you 
have?"  asked  Bress.  "  I  want  all  the  cattle  in  Ire- 
land gathered  together  upon  a  plain,  so  that  I  may 
choose  one  of  them  for  myself"  Bress  did  this; 
and  the  Dagda  took  the  black-maned  heifer  Angus 
had  told  him  of  The  king,  who  had  expected  to 
be  asked  very  much  more,  laughed  at  what  he 
thought  was  the  Dagda's  simplicity.  But  Angus 
had  been  wise;   as  will  be  seen  hereafter. 

Meanwhile  Bress  was  infuriating  the  people  of 
the  goddess  Danu  by  adding  avarice  to  tyranny. 
It  was  for  kings  to  be  liberal  to  all-comers,  but  at 
the  court  of  Bress  no  one  ever  greased  his  knife 
with  fat,  or  made  his  breath  smell  of  ale.  Nor  were 
there  ever  any  poets  or  musicians  or  jugglers  or 
jesters  there  to  give  pleasure  to  the  people;  for 
Bress  would  distribute  no  largess.  Next,  he  cut 
down  the  very  subsistence  of  the  gods.  So  scanty 
was  his  allowance  of  food  that  they  began  to  grow 
weak  with  famine.  Ogma,  through  feebleness,  could 
only  carry  one-third  of  the  wood  needed  for  fuel;  so 
that  they  suffered  from  cold  as  well  as  from  hunger. 

It  was  at  this  crisis  that  two  physicians,  Miach, 
the  son,  and  Airmid,  the  daughter,  of  Diancecht, 
the  god  of  medicine,  came  to  the  castle  where  the 
dispossessed  King  Nuada  lived.  Nuada's  porter, 
blemished,  like  himself  (for  he  had  lost  an  eye),  was 
sitting  at  the  gate,  and  on  his  lap  was  a  cat  curled 
up  asleep.      The  porter  asked   the  strangers  who 


The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God  8i 

they  were.  **  We  are  good  doctors,"  they  said.  '*  If 
that  is  so,"  he  replied,  *' perhaps  you  can  give  me  a 
new  eye."  *' Certainly,"  they  said,  ''we  could  take 
one  of  the  eyes  of  that  cat,  and  put  it  in  the  place 
where  your  lost  eye  used  to  be."  *'  I  should  be  very 
pleased  if  you  would  do  that,"  answered  the  porter. 
So  Miach  and  Airmid  removed  one  of  the  cat's 
eyes,  and  put  it  in  the  hollow  where  the  man's  eye 
had  been. 

The  story  goes  on  to  say  that  this  was  not  wholly 
a  benefit  to  him;  for  the  eye  retained  its  cat's 
nature,  and,  when  the  man  wished  to  sleep  at  nights, 
the  cat's  eye  was  always  looking  out  for  mice,  while 
it  could  hardly  be  kept  awake  during  the  day. 
Nevertheless,  he  was  pleased  at  the  time,  and  went 
and  told  Nuada,  who  commanded  that  the  doctors 
who  had  performed  this  marvellous  cure  should  be 
brought  to  him. 

As  they  came  in,  they  heard  the  king  groaning, 
for  Nuada's  wrist  had  festered  where  the  silver  hand 
joined  the  arm  of  flesh.  Miach  asked  where  Nuada's 
own  hand  was,  and  they  told  him  that  it  had  been 
buried  long  ago.  But  he  dug  it  up,  and  placed  it 
to  Nuada's  stump;  he  uttered  an  incantation  over 
it,  saying:  **  Sinew  to  sinew,  and  nerve  to  nerve  be 
joined!"  and  in  three  days  and  nights  the  hand  had 
renewed  itself  and  fixed  itself  to  the  arm,  so  that 
Nuada  was  whole  again. 

When  Diancecht,  Miach's  father,  heard  of  this, 
he  was  very  angry  to  think  that  his  son  should  have 
excelled  him  in  the  art  of  medicine.  He  sent  for  him, 
and  struck  him  upon  the  head  with  a  sword,  cutting 

(B219)  F 


82  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  skin,  but  not  wounding  the  flesh.  Miach  easily- 
healed  this.  So  Diancecht  hit  him  again,  this  time 
to  the  bone.  Again  Miach  cured  himself.  The 
third  time  his  father  smote  him,  the  sword  went 
right  through  the  skull  to  the  membrane  of  the 
brain,  but  even  this  wound  Miach  was  able  to  leech. 
At  the  fourth  stroke,  however,  Diancecht  cut  the 
brain  in  two,  and  Miach  could  do  nothing  for  that. 
He  died,  and  Diancecht  buried  him.  And  upon  his 
grave  there  grew  up  three  hundred  and  sixty-five 
stalks  of  grass,  each  one  a  cure  for  any  illness  of 
each  of  the  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  nerves  in 
a  man's  body.  Airmid,  Miach's  sister,  plucked  all 
these  very  carefully,  and  arranged  them  on  her 
mantle  according  to  their  properties.  But  her  angry 
and  jealous  father  overturned  the  cloak,  and  hope- 
lessly confused  them.  If  it  had  not  been  for  that 
act,  says  the  early  writer,  men  would  know  how  to 
cure  every  illness,  and  would  so  be  immortal. 

The  healing  of  Nuada's  blemish  happened  just 
at  the  time  when  all  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  had  at  last  agreed  that  the  exactions  and 
tyranny  of  Bress  could  no  longer  be  borne.  It  was 
the  insult  he  put  upon  Cairpr^,  son  of  Ogma  the 
god  of  literature,  that  caused  things  to  come  to 
this  head.  Poets  were  always  held  by  the  Celts  in 
great  honour;  and  when  Cairpre,  the  bard  of  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann,  went  to  visit  Bress,  he  ex- 
pected to  be  treated  with  much  consideration,  and 
fed  at  the  king's  own  table.  But,  instead  of  doing 
so,  Bress  lodged  him  in  a  small,  dark  room  where 
there  was  no  fire,  no  bed,  and  no  furniture  except 


The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God  83 

a  mean  table  on  which  small  cakes  of  dry  bread 
were  put  on  a  little  dish  for  his  food.  The  next 
morning,  Cairpre  rose  early  and  left  the  palace 
without  having  spoken  to  Bress.  It  was  the  custom 
of  poets  when  they  left  a  king's  court  to  utter  a 
panegyric  on  their  host,  but  Cairpr6  treated  Bress 
instead  to  a  magical  satire.  It  was  the  first  satire 
ever  made  in  Ireland,  and  seems  to  us  to  bear  upon 
it  all  the  marks  of  an  early  effort.  Roughly  rendered, 
it  said: 

"  No  meat  on  the  plates, 
No  milk  of  the  cows ; 

No  shelter  for  the  belated ; 
No  money  for  the  minstrels: 

May  Bress's  cheer  be  what  he  gives  to  others!" 

This  satire  of  Cairprds  was,  we  are  assured,  so 
virulent  that  it  caused  great  red  blotches  to  break 
out  all  over  Bress's  face.  This  in  itself  constituted 
a  blemish  such  as  should  not  be  upon  a  king,  and 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  called  upon  Bress  to  abdi- 
cate and  let  Nuada  take  the  throne  again. 

Bress  was  obliged  to  do  so.  He  went  back  to 
the  country  of  the  Fomors,  underneath  the  sea, 
and  complained  to  his  father  Elathan,  its  king, 
asking  him  to  gather  an  army  to  reconquer  his 
throne.  The  Fomors  assembled  in  council  —  Ela- 
than, Tethra,  Balor,  Indech,  and  all  the  other 
warriors  and  chiefs — and  they  decided  to  come  with 
a  great  host,  and  take  Ireland  away,  and  put  it 
under  the  sea  where  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  would  never  be  able  to  find  it  again. 

At   the   same   time,   another  assembly  was   also 


84  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

being  held  at  Tara,  the  capital  of  the  Tuatha  D6 
Danann.  Nuada  was  celebrating  his  return  to  the 
throne  by  a  feast  to  his  people.  While  it  was  at  its 
height,  a  stranger  clothed  like  a  king  came  to  the 
palace  gate.  The  porter  asked  him  his  name  and 
errand. 

''  I  am  called  Lugh,"  he  said.  *'  I  am  the  grand- 
son of  Diancecht  by  Cian,  my  father,  and  the  grand- 
son of  Balor  by  Ethniu,  my  mother." 

"  But  what  is  your  profession?"  asked  the  porter; 
**  for  no  one  is  admitted  here  unless  he  is  a  master 
of  some  craft." 

"  I  am  a  carpenter,"  said  Lugh. 

**  We  have  no  need  of  a  carpenter.  We  already 
have  a  very  good  one;  his  name  is  Luchtaind. 

"  I  am  an  excellent  smith,"  said  Lugh. 

**  We  do  not  want  a  smith.  We  have  a  very 
good  one;    his  name  is  Goibniu." 

**  I  am  a  professional  warrior,"  said  Lugh. 

""  We  have  no  need  of  one.  Ogma  is  our  cham- 
pion." 

**  I  am  a  harpist,"  said  Lugh. 

"We  have  an  excellent  harpist  already." 

*'  I  am  a  warrior  renowned  for  skilfulness  rather 
than  for  mere  strength." 

**  We  already  have  a  man  like  that." 

''  I  am  a  poet  and  tale-teller,"  said  Lugh. 

**  We  have  no  need  of  such.  We  have  a  most 
accomplished  poet  and  tale-teller." 

'*  I  am  a  sorcerer,"  said  Lugh. 

**  We  do  not  want  one.  We  have  numberless 
sorcerers  and  druids." 


The  Rise  of  the  Sun^God  85 

"  I  am  a  physician,"  said  Lugh. 

**  Diancecht  is  our  physician." 

**  I  am  a  cup-bearer,"  said  Lugh. 

*'  We  already  have  nine  of  them." 

**  I  am  a  worker  in  bronze." 

*'  We  have  no  need  of  you.  We  already  have  a 
worker  in  bronze.      His  name  is  Credn6." 

"  Then  ask  the  king,"  said  Lugh,  **  if  he  has  with 
him  a  man  who  is  master  of  all  these  crafts  at  once, 
for,  if  he  has,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  come  to 
Tara." 

So  the  door-keeper  went  inside,  and  told  the 
king  that  a  man  had  come  who  called  himself  Lugh 
the  loldanach^,  or  the  **  Master  of  all  Arts ",  and 
that  he  claimed  to  know  everything. 

The  king  sent  out  his  best  chess-player  to  play 
against  the  stranger.  Lugh  won,  inventing  a  new 
move  called  '' Lugh's  enclosure". 

Then  Nuada  invited  him  in.  Lugh  entered,  and 
sat  down  upon  the  chair  called  the  ''sage's  seat", 
kept  for  the  wisest  man. 

Ogma,  the  champion,  was  showing  off  his  strength. 
Upon  the  floor  was  a  flagstone  so  large  that  four- 
score yokes  of  oxen  would  have  been  needed  to 
move  it.  Ogma  pushed  it  before  him  along  the 
hall,  and  out  at  the  door.  Then  Lugh  rose  from 
his  chair,  and  pushed  it  back  again.  But  this  stone, 
huge  as  it  was,  was  only  a  portion  broken  from  a 
still  greater  rock  outside  the  palace.  Lugh  picked 
it  up,  and  put  it  back  into  its  place. 

The  Tuatha  D6  Danann  asked  him  to  play  the 

*  Pronounced  Ilddna, 


86  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

harp  to  them.  So  he  played  the  ''sleep-tune",  and 
the  king  and  all  his  court  fell  asleep,  and  did  not 
wake  until  the  same  hour  of  the  following  day. 
Next  he  played  a  plaintive  air,  and  they  all  wept. 
Lastly,  he  played  a  measure  which  sent  them  into 
transports  of  joy. 

When  Nuada  had  seen  all  these  numerous  talents 
of  Lugh,  he  began  to  wonder  whether  one  so  gifted 
would  not  be  of  great  help  against  the  Fomors. 
He  took  counsel  with  the  others,  and,  by  their 
advice,  lent  his  throne  to  Lugh  for  thirteen  days, 
taking  the  ''sage's  seat"  at  his  side. 

Lugh  summoned  all  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  to  a 
council. 

"  The  Fomors  are  certainly  going  to  make  war 
on  us,'*  he  said.  "  What  can  each  of  you  do  to 
help?" 

Diancecht  the  Physician  said:  "I  will  completely 
cure  everyone  who  is  wounded,  provided  his  head 
is  not  cut  off,  or  his  brain  or  spinal  marrow  hurt." 

*'  I,"  said  Goibniu  the  Smith,  "will  replace  every 
broken  lance  and  sword  with  a  new  one,  even  though 
the  war  last  seven  years.  And  I  will  make  the  lances 
so  well  that  they  shall  never  miss  their  mark,  or  fail 
to  kill.  Dulb,  the  smith  of  the  Fomors,  cannot  do 
as  much  as  that.  The  fate  of  the  fighting  will  be 
decided  by  my  lances." 

*'And  I,"  said  Credne  the  Bronze-worker,  "will 
furnish  all  the  rivets  for  the  lances,  the  hilts  for  the 
swords,  and  the  rims  and  bosses  for  the  shields." 

"And  I,"  said  Luchtain6  the  Carpenter,  "will 
provide  all  the  shields  and  lance -shafts." 


The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God  87 

Ogma  the  Champion  promised  to  kill  the  King 
of  the  Fomors,  with  thrice  nine  of  his  followers,  and 
to  capture  one-third  of  his  army. 

''And  you,  O  Dagda,"  said  Lugh,  ''what  will  you 
do?" 

"I  will  fight,"  said  the  Dagda,  "both  with  force 
and  craft.  Wherever  the  two  armies  meet,  I  will 
crush  the  bones  of  the  Fomors  with  my  club,  till 
they  are  like  hailstones  under  a  horse's  feet." 

"And  you,  O  Morrigu?"  said  Lugh. 

"  I  will  pursue  them  when  they  flee,"  she  replied. 
"And  I  always  catch  what  I  chase." 

"And  you,  O  Cairpr6,  son  of  Etan?"  said  Lugh 
to  the  poet,  "what  can  you  do?" 

"  I  will  pronounce  an  immediately-effective  curse 
upon  them;  by  one  of  my  satires  I  will  take  away 
all  their  honour,  and,  enchanted  by  me,  they  shall 
not  be  able  to  stand  against  our  warriors." 

"And  ye,  O  sorcerers,  what  will  ye  do?" 

"  We  will  hurl  by  our  magic  arts,"  replied  Math- 
gan,  the  head  sorcerer,  "the  twelve  mountains  of 
Ireland  at  the  Fomors.  These  mountains  will  be 
Slieve  League,  Denna  Ulad,  the  Mourne  Moun- 
tains, Bri  Ruri,  Slieve  Bloom,  Slieve  Snechta, 
Slemish,  Blai-Sliab,  Nephin,  Sliab  Maccu  Belgodon, 
Segais\  and  Cruachan  Aigle^ ". 

Then  Lugh  asked  the  cup-bearers  what  they 
would  do. 

"We  will  hide  away  by  magic,"  they  said,  "the 
twelve  chief  lakes  and  the  twelve  chief  rivers  of 
Ireland  from  the  Fomors,  so  that  they  shall  not  be 

*  The  Curlieu  Hills,  between  Roscommon  and  Sligo.  '  Croagh  Patrick. 


88  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

able  to  find  any  water,  however  thirsty  they  may 
be;  those  waters  will  conceal  themselves  from  the 
Fomors  so  that  they  shall  not  get  a  drop,  while  they 
will  give  drink  to  the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu 
as  long  as  the  war  lasts,  even  if  it  last  seven  years." 
And  they  told  Lugh  that  the  twelve  chief  lakes  were 
Lough  Derg,  Lough  Luimnigh^  Lough  Corrib, 
Lough  Ree,  Lough  Mask,  Strangford  Lough, 
Lough  Laeig,  Lough  Neagh,  Lough  Foyle,  Lough 
Gara,  Lough  Reagh,  and  Mdrloch,  and  that  the 
twelve  chief  rivers  were  the  Bush,  the  Boyne,  the 
Bann,  the  Nem,  the  Lee,  the  Shannon,  the  Moy, 
the  Sligo,  the  Erne,  the  Finn,  the  Liffey,  and  the 
Suir. 

Finally,  the  Druid,  Figol,  son  of  Mamos,  said: 
**  I  will  send  three  streams  of  fire  into  the  faces  of 
the  Fomors,  and  I  will  take  away  two-thirds  of  their 
valour  and  strength,  but  every  breath  drawn  by  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu  will  only  make  them 
more  valorous  and  strong,  so  that  even  if  the  fight- 
ing lasts  seven  years,  they  will  not  be  weary  of  it. 

All  decided  to  make  ready  for  a  war,  and  to  give 
the  direction  of  it  to  Lugh. 

^  The  estuary  of  the  Shannon. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

THE    GAELIC    ARGONAUTS 

The  preparations  for  this  war  are  said  to  have 
lasted  seven  years.  It  was  during  the  interval  that 
there  befel  an  episode  which  might  almost  be  called 
the  '' Argonautica"  of  the  Gaelic  mythology.^ 

In  spite  of  the  dethronement  of  Bress,  the  Fomors 
still  claimed  their  annual  tribute  from  the  tribe  of  the 
goddess  Danu,  and  sent  their  tax-gatherers,  nine 
times  nine  in  number,  to  *'  Balor's  Hill"  to  collect  it. 
But,  while  they  waited  for  the  gods  to  come  to 
tender  their  submission  and  their  subsidy,  they  saw 
a  young  man  approaching  them.  He  was  riding 
upon  "Splendid  Mane",  the  horse  of  Mananndn 
son  of  Ler,  and  was  dressed  in  Mananndn's  breast- 
plate and  helmet,  through  which  no  weapon  could 
wound  their  wearer,  and  he  was  armed  with  sword 
and  shield  and  poisoned  darts.  *'  Like  to  the  setting 
sun",  says  the  story,  "  was  the  splendour  of  his  coun- 
tenance and  his  forehead,  and  they  were  not  able  to 
look  in  his  face  for  the  greatness  of  his  splendour." 
And  no  wonder!  for  he  was  Lugh  the  Far-shooter, 
the  new-come  sun-god  of  the  Gaels.     He  fell  upon 

^  This  story  of  the  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Tuirenn  is  mentioned  in  the  ninth- 
century  "Cormac's  Glossary".  It  is  found  in  various  Irish  and  Scottish  MSS., 
including  the  Book  of  Lecan.  The  present  re-telling  is  from  Eugene  O'Curry's 
translation,  published  in  Atlantis,  Vol,  IV. 

89 


go  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  Fomorian  tax-gatherers,  killing  all  but  nine  of 
them,  and  these  he  only  spared  that  they  might  go 
back  to  their  kinsmen  and  tell  how  the  gods  had 
received  them. 

There  was  consternation  in  the  under-sea  country. 
**  Who  can  this  terrible  warrior  be?"  asked  Balor. 
**  I  know,"  said  Balor's  wife;  '*he  must  be  the  son  of 
our  daugher  Ethniu;  and  I  foretell  that,  since  he 
has  cast  in  his  lot  with  his  father's  people,  we 
shall  never  bear  rule  in  Erin  again." 

The  chiefs  of  the  Fomors  saw  that  this  slaughter 
of  their  tax-gatherers  signified  that  the  Tuatha  D6 
Danann  meant  fighting.  They  held  a  council  to 
debate  on  it.  There  came  to  it  Elathan  and  Tethra 
and  Indech,  kings  of  the  Fomors;  Bress  himself, 
and  Balor  of  the  stout  blows ;  Cethlenn  the  crooked 
tooth,  Balor's  wife;  Balor's  twelve  white-mouthed 
sons;  and  all  the  chief  Fomorian  warriors  and 
druids. 

Meanwhile,  upon  earth,  Lugh  was  sending  mes- 
sengers all  over  Erin  to  assemble  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann.  Upon  this  errand  went  Lugh's  father 
Cian,  who  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  lesser  solar 
deity,^  son  of  Diancecht,  the  god  of  medicine.  As 
Cian  was  going  over  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,^  he 
saw  three  armed  warriors  approaching  him,  and, 
when  they  got  nearer,  he  recognized  them  as  the 
three  sons  of  Tuirenn,  son  of  Ogma,  whose  names 
were  Brian,  luchar,  and  lucharba.  Between  these 
three  and   Cian,  with  his  brothers  Cethd  and  Cu, 

1  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  390-396. 

2  A  part  of  County  Louth,  between  the  Boyne  and  Dundalk,     The  heroic  cycle 
connects  it  especially  with  Cuchulainn.     Pronounced  Murthemna  or  MUrh&vna, 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  91 

I 

there  was,  for  some  reason,  a  private  enmity.  Cian 
saw  that  he  was  now  at  a  disadvantage.  '*  If  my 
brothers  were  with  me,"  he  said  to  himself,  ''what  a 
fight  we  would  make ;  but,  as  I  am  alone,  it  will  be 
best  for  me  to  conceal  myself"  Looking  round,  he 
saw  a  herd  of  pigs  feeding  on  the  plain.  Like  all 
the  gods,  he  had  the  faculty  of  shape-shifting;  so, 
striking  himself  with  a  magic  wand,  he  changed  him- 
self into  a  pig,  joined  the  herd,  and  began  feeding 
with  them. 

But  he  had  been  seen  by  the  sons  of  Tuirenn. 
**  What  has  become  of  the  warrior  who  was  walking 
on  the  plain  a  moment  ago?"  said  Brian  to  his 
brothers.  *' We  saw  him  then,"  they  replied,  **but 
we  do  not  know  where  he  is  now."  **  Then  you 
have  not  used  the  proper  vigilance  which  is  needed 
in  time  of  war,"  said  the  elder  brother.  "  How- 
ever, I  know  what  has  become  of  him.  He  has 
struck  himself  with  a  druidical  wand,  and  changed 
himself  into  a  pig,  and  there  he  is,  in  that  herd, 
rooting  up  the  ground,  just  like  all  the  other  pigs. 
I  can  also  tell  you  who  he  is.  His  name  is  Cian, 
and  you  know  that  he  is  no  friend  of  ours." 

**  It  is  a  pity  that  he  has  taken  refuge  among  the 
pigs,"  they  replied,  ''for  they  belong  to  some  one  of 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  and,  even  If  we  were  to  kill 
them  all,  Cian  might  still  escape  us." 

Again  Brian  reproached  his  brothers.  "  You  are 
very  ignorant,"  he  said,  "if  you  cannot  distinguish 
a  magical  beast  from  a  natural  beast.  However,  I 
will  show  you."  And  thereupon  he  struck  his  two 
brothers  with  his  own  wand  of  shape-changing,  and 


92  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

turned  them  into  two  swift,  slender  hounds,  and  set 
them  upon  the  pigs. 

The  magic  hounds  soon  found  the  magic  pig,  and 
drove  it  out  of  the  herd  on  to  the  open  plain.  Then 
Brian  threw  his  spear,  and  hit  it.  The  wounded  pig 
came  to  a  stop.  "It  was  an  evil  deed  of  yours,  cast- 
ing that  spear,"  it  cried,  in  a  human  voice,  **for  I 
am  not  a  pig,  but  Cian,  son  of  Diancecht.  So  give 
me  quarter." 

luchar  and  lucharba  would  have  granted  it,  and 
let  him  go ;  but  their  fiercer  brother  swore  that  Cian 
should  be  put  an  end  to,  even  if  he  came  back  to 
life  seven  times.  So  Cian  tried  a  fresh  ruse.  ''Give 
me  leave ",  he  asked,  "  only  to  return  to  my  own 
shape  before  you  slay  me."  ''Gladly,"  replied 
Brian,  "  for  I  would  much  rather  kill  a  man  than 
a  pig." 

So  Cian  spoke  the  befitting  spell,  cast  off  his 
pig's  disguise,  and  stood  before  them  in  his  own 
shape.  "  You  will  be  obliged  to  spare  my  life 
now,"  he  said.  "We  will  not,"  replied  Brian. 
"  Then  it  will  be  the  worst  day  s  work  for  all  of 
you  that  you  ever  did  in  your  lives,"  he  answered; 
"  for,  if  you  had  killed  me  in  the  shape  of  a  pig,  you 
would  only  have  had  to  pay  the  value  of  a  pig,  but 
if  you  kill  me  now,  I  tell  you  that  there  never  has 
been,  and  there  never  will  be,  anyone  killed  in  this 
world  for  whose  death  a  greater  blood-fine  will  be 
exacted  than  for  mine." 

But  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  would  not  listen  to  him. 
They  slew  him,  and  pounded  his  body  with  stones 
until  it  was  a  crushed  mass.     Six  times  they  tried 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  93 

to  bury  him,  and  the  earth  cast  him  back  in  horror; 
but,  the  seventh  time,  the  mould  held  him,  and  they 
put  stones  upon  him  to  keep  him  down.  They  left 
him  buried  there,  and  went  to  Tara. 

Meanwhile  Lugh  had  been  expecting  his  father's 
return.  As  he  did  not  come,  he  determined  to  go 
and  look  for  him.  He  traced  him  to  the  Plain  of 
Muirthemne,  and  there  he  was  at  fault.  But  the 
indignant  earth  itself,  which  had  witnessed  the 
murder,  spoke  to  Lugh,  and  told  him  everything. 
So  Lugh  dug  up  his  father's  corpse,  and  made 
certain  how  he  had  come  to  his  death;  then  he 
mourned  over  him,  and  laid  him  back  in  the  earth, 
and  heaped  a  barrow  over  him,  and  set  up  a  pillar 
with  his  name  on  it  in  **ogam".^ 

He  went  back  to  Tara,  and  entered  the  great 
hall.  It  was  filled  with  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu,  and  among  them  Lugh  saw  the  three  sons 
of  Tuirenn.  So  he  shook  the  ''chiefs'  chain",  with 
which  the  Gaels  used  to  ask  for  a  hearing  in  an 
assembly,  and  when  all  were  silent,  he  said: 

*'  People  of  the  goddess  Danu,  I  ask  you  a  ques- 
tion. What  would  be  the  vengeance  that  any  of 
you  would  take  upon  one  who  had  murdered  his 
father.^" 

A  great  astonishment  fell  upon  them,  and  Nuada, 
their  king,  said:  ''Surely  it  is  not  your  father  that 
has  been  murdered?" 

"It  is,"  replied    Lugh.     "And   I  am  looking  at 


*  There  is  known  to  have  been  a  hill  called  Ard  Chein  (Clan's  Mound)  in  the 
district  of  Muirthemne,  and  O' Curry  identifies  it  tentatively  with  one  now  called 
Dromshan. 


94  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

those  who  murdered  him;  and  they  know  how  they 
did  it  better  than   I   do." 

**  Then  Nuada  declared  that  nothing  short  of 
hewing  the  murderer  of  his  father  Hmb  from  limb 
would  satisfy  him,  and  all  the  others  said  the  same, 
including  the  sons  of  Tuirenn. 

**The  very  ones  who  did  the  deed  say  that," 
cried  Lugh.  **  Then  let  them  not  leave  the  hall 
till  they  have  settled  with  me  about  the  blood-fine 
to  be  paid  for  it." 

"If  it  was  I  who  had  killed  your  father,"  said  the 
king,  **  I  should  think  myself  lucky  if  you  were 
willing  to  accept  a  fine  instead  of  vengeance." 

The  sons  of  Tuirenn  took  counsel  together  in 
whispers.  luchar  and  lucharba  were  in  favour  of 
admitting  their  guilt,  but  Brian  was  afraid  that,  if 
they  confessed,  Lugh  would  withdraw  his  offer  to 
accept  a  fine,  and  would  demand  their  deaths.  So 
he  stood  out,  and  said  that,  though  it  was  not  they 
who  had  killed  Cian,  yet,  sooner  than  remain  under 
Lugh's  anger,  as  he  suspected  them,  they  would 
pay  the  same  fine  as  if  they  had. 

**  Certainly  you  shall  pay  the  fine,"  said  Lugh, 
*'and  I  will  tell  you  what  it  shall  be.  It  is  this: 
three  apples;  and  a  pig's-skin;  and  a  spear;  and 
two  horses  and  a  chariot;  and  seven  pigs;  and  a 
hound- whelp;  and  a  cooking-spit;  and  three  shouts 
on  a  hill :  that  is  the  fine,  and,  if  you  think  it  is  too 
much,  I  will  remit  some  of  it,  but,  if  you  do  not 
think  it  is  too  much,  then  pay  it." 

*'  If  it  were  a  hundred  times  that,"  replied  Brian, 
"we   should   not   think   it    too   much.      Indeed,   it 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  95 

seems  so  little  that  I  fear  there  must  be  some 
treachery  concealed  in  it." 

**  I  do  not  think  it  too  little,"  replied  Lugh. 
**  Give  me  your  pledge  before  the  people  of  the 
goddess  Danu  that  you  will  pay  it  faithfully,  and 
I  will  give  you  mine  that  I  will  ask  no  more." 

So  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  bound  themselves  before 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  to  pay  the  fine  to  Lugh. 

When  they  had  sworn,  and  given  sureties,  Lugh 
turned  to  them  again.  "  I  will  now ",  he  said, 
**  explain  to  you  the  nature  of  the  fine  you  have 
pledged  yourselves  to  pay  me,  so  that  you  may 
know  whether  it  is  too  little  or  not."  And,  with 
foreboding  hearts,  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  set  them- 
selves to  listen. 

"The  three  apples  that  I  have  demanded,"  he 
began,  **are  three  apples  from  the  Garden  of  the 
Hesperides,  in  the  east  of  the  world.  You  will 
know  them  by  three  signs.  They  are  the  size  of 
the  head  of  a  month-old  child,  they  are  of  the 
colour  of  burnished  gold,  and  they  taste  of  honey. 
Wounds  are  healed  and  diseases  cured  by  eating 
them,  and  they  do  not  diminish  in  any  way  by 
being  eaten.  Whoever  casts  one  of  them  hits 
anything  he  wishes,  and  then  it  comes  back  into 
his  hand.  I  will  accept  no  other  apples  instead  of 
these.  Their  owners  keep  them  perpetually  guarded 
because  of  a  prophecy  that  three  young  warriors 
from  the  west  of  the  world  will  come  to  take  them 
by  force,  and,  brave  as  you  may  be,  I  do  not  think 
that  you  will  ever  get  them. 

**The  pigs-skin    that    I    have  demanded  is  the 


96  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

pigs-skin  of  Tuis,  King  of  Greece.  It  has  two 
virtues:  its  touch  perfectly  cures  all  wounded  or 
sick  persons  if  only  there  is  any  life  still  left  in 
them;  and  every  stream  of  water  through  which  it 
passes  is  turned  into  wine  for  nine  days.  I  do  not 
think  that  you  will  get  it  from  the  King  of  Greece, 
either  with  his  consent  or  without  it. 

"  And  can  you  guess  what  spear  it  is  that  I  have 
demanded?"  asked  Lugh.  ''We  cannot,"  they  said. 
**  It  is  the  poisoned  spear  of  Pisear\  King  of  Persia; 
it  is  irresistible  in  battle;  it  is  so  fiery  that  its  blade 
must  always  be  held  under  water,  lest  it  destroy  the 
city  in  which  it  is  kept.  You  will  find  it  very  difficult 
to  obtain. 

''  And  the  two  horses  and  the  chariot  are  the  two 
wonderful  horses  of  Dobhar^  King  of  Sicily,  which 
run  equally  well  over  land  and  sea;  there  are  no 
other  horses  in  the  world  like  them,  and  no  other 
vehicle  equal  to  the  chariot. 

''And  the  seven  pigs  are  the  pigs  of  EasaP, 
King  of  the  Golden  Pillars;  though  they  may  be 
killed  every  night,  they  are  found  alive  again  the 
next  day,  and  every  person  that  eats  part  of  them 
can  never  be  afflicted  with  any  disease. 

"And  the  hound- whelp  I  claim  is  the  hound- 
whelp  of  the  King  of  loruaidhe*;  her  name  is 
Failinis;  every  wild  beast  she  sees  she  catches  at 
once.      It  will  not  be  easy  for  you  to  secure  her. 

"  The  cooking-spit  which  you  must  get  for  me  is 
one  of  the  cooking-spits  of  the  women  of  the  Island 

1  Pronounced  Pezar.  *  Pronounced  Dobar. 

3  Pronounced  Asal.  *  Pronounced  Iroda. 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  97 

of  Fianchuivd\  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea, 
between  Erin  and  Alba. 

"  You  have  also  pledged  yourselves  to  give  three 
shouts  upon  a  hill.  The  hill  upon  which  they  must 
be  given  is  the  hill  called  Cnoc  Miodhchaoin^  in 
the  north  of  Lochlann^.  Miodhchaoin  and  his  sons 
do  not  allow  shouts  to  be  given  on  that  hill ;  besides 
this,  it  was  they  who  gave  my  father  his  military 
education,  and,  even  if  I  were  to  forgive  you,  they 
would  not ;  so  that,  though  you  achieve  all  the  other 
adventures,  I  think  that  you  will  fail  in  this  one. 

"  Now  you  know  what  sort  of  a  fine  it  is  that  you 
have  bargained  to  pay  me,"  said  Lugh. 

And  fear  and  astonishment  fell  upon  the  sons  of 
Tuirenn. 

This  tale  is  evidently  the  work  of  some  ancient 
Irish  story-teller  who  wished  to  compile  from  various 
sources  a  more  or  less  complete  account  of  how  the 
Gaelic  gods  obtained  their  legendary  possessions. 
The  spear  of  Pisear,  King  of  Persia,  is  obviously 
the  same  weapon  as  the  lance  of  Lugh,  which 
another  tradition  describes  as  having  been  brought 
by  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  from  their  original  home 
in  the  city  of  Gorias;*  Failinis,  the  whelp  of  the 
King  of  loruaidhe,  is  Lugh's  ''hound  of  mightiest 
deeds  ",  which  was  irresistible  in  battle,  and  which 
turned  any  running  water  it  bathed  in  into  wine,^ 
a  property  here  transferred  to  the  magic  pig  s-skin 
of  King  Tuis:  the  seven  swine  of  the  King  of  the 

*  Pronounced  Fincdra.  ^  The  Hill  (cnoc)  of  Midkena. 

3  A  mythical  country  inhabited  by  Fomors. 

4  See  chap,  vi— "  The  Gods  Arrive  ".  »  Ibid. 
(B219)  a 


98  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Golden  Pillars  must  be  the  same  undying  porkers 
from  whose  flesh  Mananndn  mac  Lir  made  the 
"  Feast  of  Age  "  which  preserved  the  eternal  youth 
of  the  gods;^  it  was  with  horses  and  chariot  that 
ran  along  the  surface  of  the  sea  that  Mananndn 
used  to  journey  to  and  fro  between  Erin  and  the 
Celtic  Elysium  in  the  West;^  the  apples  that  grew 
in  the  Garden  of  the  Hesperides  were  surely  of  the 
same  celestial  growth  as  those  that  fed  the  inhabit- 
ants of  that  immortal  country;^  while  the  cooking- 
spit  reminds  us  of  three  such  implements  at  Tara, 
made  by  Goibniu  and  associated  with  the  names  of 
the  Dagda  and  the  Morrigu.* 

The  burden  of  collecting  all  these  treasures  was 
placed  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  three  sons  of 
Tuirenn. 

They  consulted  together,  and  agreed  that  they 
could  never  hope  to  succeed  unless  they  had  Ma- 
nanndn's  magic  horse,  *'  Splendid  Mane",  and  Ma- 
nannan's  magic  coracle,  **  Wave -sweeper ".  But 
both  these  had  been  lent  by  Mananndn  to  Lugh 
himself  So  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  were  obliged  to 
humble  themselves  to  beg  them  from  Lugh.  The 
sun-god  would  not  lend  them  the  horse,  for  fear  of 
making  their  task  too  easy,  but  he  let  them  have 
the  boat,  because  he  knew  how  much  the  spear  of 
Pisear  and  the  horses  of  Dobhar  would  be  needed 
in  the  coming  war  with  the  Fomors.  They  bade 
farewell  to  their  father,  and  went  down  to  the  shore 
and  put  out  to  sea,  taking  their  sister  with  them. 

1  See  chap,  vi— " The  Gods  Arrive  ".         2  gee  chap,  xi — "The  Gods  in  Exile". 
■  Ibid.  *  Petrie:  Hist,  and  Antiq.  of  Tara  Hill. 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  99 

"Which  portion  of  the  fine  shall  we  seek  first?" 
said  the  others  to  Brian.  "  We  will  seek  them  in 
the  order  in  which  they  were  demanded,"  he  replied. 
So  they  directed  the  magic  boat  to  sail  to  the  Garden 
of  the  Hesperides,  and  presently  they  arrived  there. 

They  landed  at  a  harbour,  and  held  a  council  of 
war.  It  was  decided  that  their  best  chance  of  ob- 
taining three  of  the  apples  would  be  by  taking  the 
shapes  of  hawks.  Thus  they  would  have  strength 
enough  in  their  claws  to  carry  the  apples  away, 
together  with  sufficient  quickness  upon  the  wing  to 
hope  to  escape  the  arrows,  darts,  and  sling-stones 
which  would  be  shot  and  hurled  at  them  by  the 
warders  of  the  garden. 

They  swooped  down  upon  the  orchard  from  above. 
It  was  done  so  swiftly  that  they  carried  off  the  three 
apples,  unhit  either  by  shaft  or  stone.  But  their 
difficulties  were  not  yet  over.  The  king  of  the 
country  had  three  daughters  who  were  well  skilled 
in  witchcraft.  By  sorcery  they  changed  themselves 
into  three  ospreys,  and  pursued  the  three  hawks. 
But  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  reached  the  shore  first, 
and,  changing  themselves  into  swans,  dived  into 
the  sea.  They  came  up  close  to  their  coracle,  and 
got  into  it,  and  sailed  swiftly  away  with  the  spoil. 

Thus  their  first  quest  was  finished,  and  they 
voyaged  on  to  Greece,  to  seek  the  pig's-skin  of  King 
Tuis.  No  one  could  go  without  some  excuse  into 
a  king's  court,  so  they  decided  to  disguise  them- 
selves as  poets,  and  to  tell  the  door-keeper  that 
they  were  professional  bards  from  Erin,  seeking 
largess  at  the  hands  of  kings.     The  porter  let  them 


lOO         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

into  the  great  hall,  where  the  poets  of  Greece  were 
singing  before  the  king. 

When  those  had  all  finished,  Brian  rose,  and 
asked  permission  to  show  his  art.  This  was  ac- 
corded;   and  he  sang: 

"  O  Tuis,  we  conceal  not  thy  fame. 
We  praise  thee  as  the  oak  above  the  kings; 
The  skin  of  a  pig,  bounty  without  hardness ! 
This  is  the  reward  which  I  ask  for  it. 

"  A  stormy  host  and  raging  sea 
Are  a  dangerous  power,  should  one  oppose  it. 
The  skin  of  a  pig,  bounty  without  hardness ! 
This  is  the  reward  I  ask,  O  Tuis." 

**That  is  a  good  poem,"  said  the  king,  "only  I 
do  not  understand  it." 

"■  I  will  explain  it,"  said  Brian.  *'*  We  praise  thee 
as  the  oak  above  the  kings' \  this  means  that,  as  the 
oak  excels  all  other  trees,  so  do  you  excel  all  other 
kings  in  nobility  and  generosity.  *  The  skin  of  a 
pig,  bounty  without  hardness' \  that  is  a  pig's-skin 
which  you  have,  O  Tuis,  and  which  I  should  like  to 
receive  as  the  reward  of  my  poem.  *  A  stormy  host 
and  raging  sea  are  a  dangerous  power,  should  one 
oppose  it'  \  this  means  to  say,  that  we  are  not  used 
to  going  without  anything  on  which  we  have  set  our 
hearts,  O  Tuis." 

*'  I  should  have  liked  your  poem  better,"  replied 
the  king,  *'  if  my  pig's-skin  had  not  been  mentioned 
in  it.  It  was  not  a  wise  thing  for  you  to  hrve  done, 
O  poet.  But  I  will  measure  three  fills  of  red  gold 
out  of  the  skin,  and  you  shall  have  those." 


BRIAN    SEIZES    THE    PIG-SKIN 
From  the  Drawing  by  J.  H.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  loi 

''May  all  good  be  thine,  O  King!"  answered 
Brian.  '*  I  knew  that  I  should  get  a  noble  re- 
ward." 

So  the  king  sent  for  the  pig's -skin  to  measure 
out  the  gold  with.  But,  as  soon  as  Brian  saw  it, 
he  seized  it  with  his  left  hand,  and  slew  the  man 
who  was  holding  it,  and  luchar  and  lucharba  also 
hacked  about  them ;  and  they  cut  their  way  down  to 
the  boat,  leaving  the  King  of  Greece  among  the 
dead  behind  them. 

**And  now  we  will  go  and  get  King  Pisear's 
spear,"  said  Brian.  So,  leaving  Greece,  they  sailed 
in  their  coracle  to  Persia. 

Their  plan  of  disguising  themselves  as  poets  had 
served  them  so  well  that  they  decided  to  make  use 
of  it  again.  So  they  went  into  the  King  of  Persia's 
hall  in  the  same  way  as  they  had  entered  that  of  the 
King  of  Greece.  Brian  first  listened  to  the  poets  of 
Persia  singing ;  then  he  sang  his  own  song : 

"  Small  the  esteem  of  any  spear  with  Pisear; 
The  battles  of  foes  are  broken ; 
No  oppression  to  Pisear; 
Everyone  whom  he  wounds. 

"  A  yew-tree,  the  finest  of  the  wood. 
It  is  called  King  without  opposition. 
May  that  splendid  shaft  drive  on 
Yon  crowd  into  their  wounds  of  death." 

**That  is  a  good  poem,  O  man  of  Erin,"  said  the 
king,  *'but  why  is  my  spear  mentioned  in  it?" 

''The  meaning  is  this,"  replied  Brian:  "I  should 
like  to  receive  that  spear  as  a  reward  for  my  poem." 


I02         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"You  make  a  rash  request,"  said  the  king.  **  If 
I  spare  your  life  after  having  heard  it,  it  will  be  a 
sufficient  reward  for  your  poem." 

Brian  had  one  of  the  magic  apples  in  his  hand, 
and  he  remembered  its  boomerang-like  quality.  He 
hurled  it  full  in  the  King  of  Persia's  face,  dashing 
out  his  brains.  The  Persians  flew  to  arms,  but  the 
three  sons  of  Tuirenn  conquered  them,  and  made 
them  yield  up  the  spear. 

They  had  now  to  travel  to  Sicily,  to  obtain  the 
horses  and  chariot  of  King  Dobhar.  But  they  were 
afraid  to  go  as  poets  this  time,  for  fear  the  fame  of 
their  deeds  might  have  got  abroad.  They  therefore 
decided  to  pretend  to  be  mercenary  soldiers  from 
Erin,  and  offer  the  King  of  Sicily  their  service. 
This,  they  thought,  would  be  the  easiest  way  of 
finding  out  where  the  horses  and  the  chariot  were 
kept.  So  they  went  and  stood  on  the  green  before 
the  royal  court. 

When  the  King  of  Sicily  heard  that  there  had 
come  mercenaries  from  Erin,  seeking  wages  from 
the  kings  of  the  world,  he  invited  them  to  take 
service  with  him.  They  agreed ;  but,  though  they 
stayed  with  him  a  fortnight  and  a  month,  they  never 
saw  the  horses,  or  even  found  out  where  they  were 
kept.  So  they  went  to  the  king,  and  announced 
that  they  wished  to  leave  him. 

"Why?"  he  asked,  for  he  did  not  want  them  to 

go- 

"  We  will  tell  you,  O  King!"  replied  Brian.     "  It 

is  because  we  have  not  been  honoured  with  your 

confidence,  as  we  have  been  accustomed  with  other 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  103 

kings.  You  have  two  horses  and  a  chariot,  the  best 
in  the  world,  and  we  have  not  even  been  allowed  to 
see  them." 

**  I  would  have  shown  them  to  you  on  the  first 
day  if  you  had  asked  me,"  said  the  king;  ''and  you 
shall  see  them  at  once,  for  I  have  seldom  had  war- 
riors with  me  so  good  as  you  are,  and  I  do  not  wish 
you  to  leave  me." 

So  he  sent  for  the  steeds,  and  had  them  yoked  to 
the  chariot,  and  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  were  witnesses 
of  their  marvellous  speed,  and  how  they  could  run 
equally  well  over  land  or  water. 

Brian  made  a  sign  to  his  brothers,  and  they 
watched  their  opportunity  carefully,  and,  as  the 
chariot  passed  close  beside  them,  Brian  leaped  into 
it,  hurling  its  driver  over  the  side.  Then,  turning 
the  horses,  he  struck  King  Dobhar  with  Pisear  s 
spear,  and  killed  him.  He  took  his  two  brothers 
up  into  the  chariot  and  they  drove  away. 

By  the  time  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  reached  the 
country  of  Easal,  King  of  the  Pillars  of  Gold, 
rumour  had  gone  before  them.  The  king  came 
down  to  the  harbour  to  meet  them,  and  asked  them 
if  it  were  really  true  that  so  many  kings  had  fallen 
at  their  hands.  They  replied  that  it  was  true,  but 
that  they  had  no  quarrel  with  any  of  them;  only 
they  must  obtain  at  all  costs  the  fine  demanded  by 
Lugh.  Then  Easal  asked  them  why  they  had  come 
to  his  land,  and  they  told  him  that  they  needed  his 
seven  pigs  to  add  to  the  tribute.  So  Easal  thought 
it  better  to  give  them  up,  and  to  make  friends  with 
the  three  sons  of  Tuirenn,  than  to  fight  with  such 


104         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

warriors.  The  sons  of  Tuirenn  were  very  glad  at 
this,  for  they  were  growing  weary  of  battles. 

It  happened  that  the  King  of  loruaidhe,  who  had 
the  hound-whelp  that  Lugh  had  demanded,  was  the 
husband  of  King  Easal's  daughter.  Therefore  King 
Easal  did  not  wish  that  there  should  be  fighting  be- 
tween him  and  the  three  sons  of  Tuirenn.  He  pro- 
posed to  Brian  and  his  brothers  that  he  should  sail 
with  them  to  loruaidhe,  and  try  to  persuade  the  king 
of  the  country  to  give  up  the  hound-whelp  peace- 
fully. They  consented,  and  all  set  foot  safely  on 
the  ''delightful,  wonderful  shores  of  loruaidhe 'V  as 
the  manuscript  calls  them.  But  King  Easal's 
son-in-law  would  not  listen  to  reason.  He  as- 
sembled his  warriors,  and  fought;  but  the  sons 
of  Tuirenn  defeated  them,  and  compelled  their 
king  to  yield  up  the  hound-whelp  as  the  ransom 
for  his  life. 

All  these  quests  had  been  upon  the  earth,  but  the 
next  was  harder.  No  coracle,  not  even  Mananndn  s 
''Wave-sweeper",  could  penetrate  to  the  Island  of 
Fianchuiv^,  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  that  severs 
Erin  from  Alba.  So  Brian  left  his  brothers,  and 
put  on  his  "water-dress,  with  his  transparency  of 
glass  upon  his  head " — evidently  an  ancient  Irish 
anticipation  of  the  modern  diver's  dress.  Thus 
equipped,  he  explored  the  bottom  of  the  sea  for 
fourteen  days  before  he  found  the  island.  But 
when  at  last  he  reached  it,  and  entered  the  hall 
of  its  queen,  she  and  her  sea-maidens  were  so 
amazed  at  Brian's  hardihood  in  having  penetrated 

*  The  country  seems  to  have  been  identified  with  Norway  or  Iceland. 


The  Gaelic  Argonauts  105 

to  their  kingdom  that  they  presented  him  with  the 
cooking-spit,  and  sent  him  back  safe. 

By  this  time,  Lugh  had  found  out  by  his  magic 
arts  that  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  had  obtained  all  the 
treasures  he  had  demanded  as  the  blood-fine.  He 
desired  to  get  them  safely  into  his  own  custody 
before  his  victims  went  to  give  their  three  shouts 
upon  Miodhchaoin's  Hill.  He  therefore  wove  a 
druidical  spell  round  them,  so  that  they  forgot  the 
rest  of  their  task  altogether,  and  sailed  back  to  Erin. 
They  searched  for  Lugh,  to  give  him  the  things,  but 
he  had  gone  away,  leaving  word  that  they  were  to 
be  handed  over  to  Nuada,  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann 
king.  As  soon  as  they  were  in  safe-keeping,  Lugh 
came  back  to  Tara  and  found  the  sons  of  Tuirenn 
there.     And  he  said  to  them: 

*'  Do  you  not  know  that  it  is  unlawful  to  keep 
back  any  part  of  a  blood-fine.'^  So  have  you  given 
those  three  shouts  upon  Miodhchaoin's  Hill?" 

Then  the  magic  mist  of  forgetfulness  fell  from 
them,  and  they  remembered.  Sorrowfully  they 
went  back  to  complete  their  task. 

Miodhchaoin^  himself  was  watching  for  them,  and, 
when  he  saw  them  land,  he  came  down  to  the  beach. 
Brian  attacked  him,  and  they  fought  with  the  swift- 
ness of  two  bears  and  the  ferocity  of  two  lions  until 
Miodhchaoin  fell. 

Then  Miodhchaoin's  three  sons — Core,  Conn,  and 
Aedh — came  out  to  avenge  their  father,  and  they 
drove  their  spears  through  the  bodies  of  the  three 
sons  of  Tuirenn.     But  the  three  sons  of  Tuirenn 

^  Pronounced  Midkena. 


lo6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

also  drove  their  spears  through  the  bodies  of  the 
three  sons  of  Miodhchaoin. 

The  three  sons  of  Miodhchaoin  were  killed,  and 
the  three  sons  of  Tuirenn  were  so  sorely  wounded 
that  birds  might  have  flown  through  their  bodies 
from  one  side  to  the  other.  Nevertheless  Brian 
was  still  able  to  stand  upright,  and  he  held  his  two 
brothers,  one  in  each  hand,  and  kept  them  on  their 
feet,  and,  all  together,  they  gave  three  faint,  feeble 
shouts. 

Their  coracle  bore  them,  still  living,  to  Erin. 
They  sent  their  father  Tuirenn  as  a  suppliant  to 
Lugh,  begging  him  to  lend  them  the  magic  pig's- 
skin  to  heal  their  wounds. 

But  Lugh  would  not,  for  he  had  counted  upon 
their  fight  with  the  sons  of  Miodhchaoin  to  avenge 
his  father  Cian  s  death.  So  the  children  of  Tuirenn 
resigned  themselves  to  die,  and  their  father  made  a 
farewell  song  over  them  and  over  himself,  and  died 
with  them. 

Thus  ends  that  famous  tale — "  The  Fate  of  the 
Sons  of  Tuirenn ",  known  as  one  of  the  '*  Three 
Sorrowful  Stories  of  Erin".^ 

iThe  other  two  are  "The  Fate  of  the  Children  of  L6r",  told  in  chap,  xi,  and 
"The  Fate  of  the  Sons  of  Usnach",  an  episode  of  the  Heroic  Cycle,  related  in 
chap.  XIII. 


CHAPTER   IX 

THE   WAR   WITH    THE   GIANTS^ 

By  this  time  the  seven  years  of  preparation  had 
come  to  an  end.  A  week  before  the  Day  of  Sam- 
hain,  the  Morrfgii  discovered  that  the  Fomors  had 
landed  upon  Erin.  She  at  once  sent  a  messenger 
to  tell  the  Dagda,  who  ordered  his  druids  and 
sorcerers  to  go  to  the  ford  of  the  River  Unius,  in 
Sligo,  and  utter  incantations  against  them. 

The  people  of  the  goddess  Danu,  however,  were 
not  yet  quite  ready  for  battle.  So  the  Dagda 
decided  to  visit  the  Fomorian  camp  as  an  ambas- 
sador, and,  by  parleying  with  them,  to  gain  a  little 
more  time.  The  Fomors  received  him  with  ap- 
parent courtesy,  and,  to  celebrate  his  coming,  pre- 
pared him  a  feast  of  porridge ;  for  it  was  well-known 
how  fond  he  was  of  such  food.  They  poured  into 
their  king's  cauldron,  which  was  as  deep  as  five 
giant's  fists,  fourscore  gallons  of  new  milk,  with 
meal  and  bacon  in  proportion.  To  this  they  added 
the  whole  carcasses  of  goats,  sheep,  and  pigs;  they 
boiled  the  mixture  together,  and  poured  it  into  a  hole 
in  the  ground.     **  Now,"  said  they,  '*if  you  do  not 

^  This  chapter  is,  with  slight  interpolations,  based  upon  the  Harleian  MS.  in 
the  British  Museum  numbered  5280,  and  called  the  Second  Battle  of  Moytura,  or 
rather  from  translations  made  of  it  by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  published  in  the  Revue 
Celtique,  Vol.  XII,  and  by  M.  de  Jubainville  in  his  L'Epopie  Celtique  en  Irlande. 

107 


io8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

eat  it  all,  we  shall  put  you  to  death,  for  we  will  not 
have  you  go  back  to  your  own  people  and  say  that 
the  Fomors  are  inhospitable."  But  they  did  not 
succeed  in  frightening  the  Dagda.  He  took  his 
spoon,  which  was  so  large  that  two  persons  of  our 
puny  size  might  have  reclined  comfortably  in  the 
middle  of  it,  dipped  it  into  the  porridge,  and  fished 
up  halves  of  salted  pork  and  quarters  of  bacon. 

**  If  it  tastes  as  good  as  it  smells,"  he  said,  **  it  is 
good  fare."  And  so  it  proved;  for  he  ate  it  all,  and 
scraped  up  even  what  remained  at  the  bottom  of  the 
hole.  Then  he  went  away  to  sleep  it  off,  followed 
by  the  laughter  of  the  Fomors;  for  his  stomach 
was  so  swollen  with  food  that  he  could  hardly 
walk.  It  was  larger  than  the  biggest  cauldron  in 
a  large  house,  and  stood  out  like  a  sail  before  the 
wind. 

But  the  Fomors'  little  practical  joke  upon  the 
Dagda  had  given  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  time  to 
collect  their  forces.  It  was  on  the  eve  of  Samhain 
that  the  two  armies  came  face  to  face.  Even  then 
the  Fomors  could  not  believe  that  the  people  of  the 
goddess  Danu  would  offer  them  much  resistance. 

''  Do  you  think  they  will  really  dare  to  give  us 
battle?"  said  Bress  to  Indech,  the  son  of  Domnu. 
*'  If  they  do  not  pay  their  tribute,  we  will  pound 
their  bones  for  them,"  he  replied. 

The  war  of  gods  and  giants  naturally  mirrored 
the  warfare  of  the  Gaels,  in  whose  battles,  as  in  those 
of  most  semi-barbarous  people,  single  combat  figured 
largely.  The  main  armies  stood  still,  while,  every 
day,  duels  took  place  between  ambitious  combatants. 


The   War  with  the  Giants  109 

But   no   great   warriors  either  of  the  Tuatha    D6 
Danann  or  of  the  Fomors  took  part  in  them. 

Sometimes  a  god,  sometimes  a  giant  would  be 
the  victor;  but  there  was  a  difference  in  the  net 
results  that  astonished  the  Fomors.  If  their  own 
swords  and  lances  were  broken,  they  were  of  no 
more  use,  and  if  their  own  champions  were  killed, 
they  never  came  back  to  life  again ;  but  it  was  quite 
otherwise  with  the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu. 
Weapons  shattered  on  one  day  re-appeared  upon 
the  next  in  as  good  condition  as  though  they  had 
never  been  used,  and  warriors  slain  on  one  day  came 
back  upon  the  morrow  unhurt,  and  ready,  if  neces- 
sary, to  be  killed  again. 

The  Fomors  decided  to  send  someone  to  discover 
the  secret  of  these  prodigies.  The  spy  they  chose 
was  Ruadan,  the  son  of  Bress  and  of  Brigit,  daughter 
of  the  Dagda,  and  therefore  half-giant  and  half-god. 
He  disguised  himself  as  a  Tuatha  De  Danann 
warrior,  and  went  to  look  for  Goibniu.  Pie  found 
him  at  his  forge,  together  with  Luchtain6,  the  car- 
penter, and  Credn6,  the  bronze- worker.  He  saw 
how  Goibniu  forged  lance-heads  with  three  blows  of 
his  hammer,  while  Luchtain6  cut  shafts  for  them 
with  three  blows  of  his  axe,  and  Credne  fixed  the 
two  parts  together  so  adroitly  that  his  bronze  nails 
needed  no  hammering  in.  He  went  back  and  told 
the  Fomors,  who  sent  him  again,  this  time  to  try 
and  kill  Goibniu. 

He  reappeared  at  the  forge,  and  asked  for  a 
javelin.  Without  suspicion,  Goibniu  gave  him  one, 
and,  as  soon  as  he  got  it  into  his  hand,  he  thrust  it 


no         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

through  the  smith's  body.  But  Goibniu  plucked  it 
out,  and,  hurHng  it  back  at  his  assailant,  mortally 
wounded  him.  Ruadan  went  home  to  die,  and  his 
father  Bress  and  his  mother  Brigit  mourned  for  him, 
inventing  for  the  purpose  the  Irish  ''keening". 
Goibniu,  on  the  other  hand,  took  no  harm.  He 
went  to  the  physician  Diancecht,  who,  with  his 
daughter  Airmid,  was  always  on  duty  at  a  miracu- 
lous well  called  the  ''spring  of  health".  Whenever 
one  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  was  killed  or 
wounded,  he  was  brought  to  the  two  doctors,  who 
plunged  him  into  the  wonder-working  water,  and 
brought  him  back  to  life  and  health  again. 

The  mystic  spring  was  not  long,  however,  allowed 
to  help  the  people  of  the  goddess.  A  young  Fo- 
morian  chief,  Octriallach  son  of  Indech,  found  it  out. 
He  and  a  number  of  his  companions  went  to  it  by 
night,  each  carrying  a  large  stone  from  the  bed  of 
the  River  Drowes.  These  they  dropped  into  the 
spring,  until  they  had  filled  it,  dispersed  the  healing 
water,  and  formed  a  cairn  above  it.  Legend  has 
identified  this  place  by  the  name  of  the  "  Cairn  of 
Octriallach  ". 

This  success  determined  the  Fomors  to  fight  a 
pitched  battle.  They  drew  out  their  army  in  line. 
There  was  not  a  warrior  in  it  who  had  not  a  coat  of 
mail  and  a  helmet,  a  stout  spear,  a  strong  buckler, 
and  a  heavy  sword.  "  Fighting  the  Fomors  on  that 
day  ",  says  the  old  author,  "  could  only  be  compared 
to  one  of  three  things — beating  one's  head  against  a 
rock,  or  plunging  it  into  a  fire,  or  putting  one's  hand 
into  a  serpent's  nest." 


The    War  with  the  Giants  1 1 1 

All  the  great  fighters  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann 
were  drawn  out  opposite  to  them,  except  Lugh.  A 
council  of  the  gods  had  decided  that  his  varied 
accomplishments  made  his  life  too  valuable  to  be 
risked  in  battle.  They  had,  therefore,  left  him 
behind,  guarded  by  nine  warriors.  But,  at  the  last 
moment,  Lugh  escaped  from  his  warders,  and  ap- 
peared in  his  chariot  before  the  army.  He  made 
them  a  patriotic  speech.  ''  Fight  bravely,"  he  said, 
**  that  your  servitude  may  last  no  longer;  it  is  better 
to  face  death  than  to  live  in  vassalage  and  pay 
tribute."  With  these  encouraging  words,  he  drove 
round  the  ranks,  standing  on  tiptoe,  so  that  all  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann  might  see  him. 

The  Fomors  saw  him  too,  and  marvelled.  '*  It 
seems  wonderful  to  me,"^  said  Bress  to  his  druids, 
*'  that  the  sun  should  rise  in  the  west  to-day  and  in 
the  east  every  other  day."  "It  would  be  better  for 
us  if  it  were  so,"  replied  the  druids.  **What  else 
can  it  be,  then?"  asked  Bress.  ''It  is  the  radiance 
of  the  face  of  Lugh  of  the  Long  Arms,"  said  they. 

Then  the  two  armies  charged  each  other  with  a 
great  shout.  Spears  and  lances  smote  against  shields, 
and  so  great  was  the  shouting  of  the  fighters,  the 
shattering  of  shields,  the  clattering  of  swords,  the 
rattling  of  quivers,  and  the  whistling  of  darts  and 
javelins  that  it  seemed  as  if  thunder  rolled  every- 
where. 

They  fought  so  closely  that  the  heads,  hands,  and 


^  I  have  interpolated  this  picturesque  passage  from  the  account  of  a  fight  between 
the  Tuatha  De  Danann  and  the  Fomors  in  the  "  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Tuirenn  ". 
O'Curry's  translation  in  Atlantis,  Vol.  IV. 


112         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

feet  of  those  on  one  side  were  touching  the  heads, 
hands,  and  feet  of  those  on  the  other  side;  they 
shed  so  much  blood  on  to  the  ground  that  it  became 
hard  to  stand  on  it  without  slipping;  and  the  river 
of  Unsenn  was  filled  with  dead  bodies,  so  hard  and 
swift  and  bloody  and  cruel  was  the  battle. 

Many  great  chiefs  fell  on  each  side.  Ogma,  the 
champion  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  killed  Indech, 
the  son  of  the  goddess  Domnu.  But,  meanwhile, 
Balor  of  the  Mighty  Blows  raged  among  the  gods, 
slaying  their  king,  Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand,  as  well 
as  Macha,  one  of  his  warlike  wives.  At  last  he 
met  with  Lugh.  The  sun-god  shouted  a  challenge 
to  his  grandfather  in  the  Fomorian  speech.  Balor 
heard  it,  and  prepared  to  use  his  death-dealing 
eye. 

"  Lift  up  my  eyelid,"  he  said  to  his  henchmen, 
**that    I     may    see    this    chatterer    who    talks    to 


me. 


The  attendants  lifted  Balor  s  eye  with  a  hook, 
and  if  the  glance  of  the  eye  beneath  had  rested 
upon  Lugh,  he  would  certainly  have  perished.  But, 
when  it  was  half  opened,  Lugh  flung  a  magic  stone 
which  struck  Balor's  eye  out  through  the  back  of  his 
head.  The  eye  fell  on  the  ground  behind  Balor,  and 
destroyed  a  whole  rank  of  thrice  nine  Fomors  who 
were  unlucky  enough  to  be  within  sight  of  it. 

An  ancient  poem  has  handed  down  the  secret  of 
this  magic  stone.  It  is  there  called  a  tathlum,  mean- 
ing a  *' concrete  ball "  such  as  the  ancient  Irish  war- 
riors used  sometimes  to  make  out  of  the  brains  of 
dead  enemies  hardened  with  lime. 


The    War  with  the  Giants  113 

"  A  tathlum,  heavy,  fiery,  firm, 
Which  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  had  with  them, 
It  was  that  broke  the  fierce  Balor's  eye. 
Of  old,  in  the  battle  of  the  great  armies. 

"  The  blood  of  toads  and  furious  bears, 
And  the  blood  of  the  noble  lion. 
The  blood  of  vipers  and  of  Osmuinn's  trunks ; — 
It  was  of  these  the  tathlum  was  composed. 

"  The  sand  of  the  swift  Armorian  sea. 
And  the  sand  of  the  teeming  Red  Sea ; — 
All  these,  being  first  purified,  were  used 
In  the  composition  of  the  tathlum. 

"  Briun,  the  son  of  Bethar,  no  mean  warrior, 
Who  on  the  ocean's  eastern  border  reigned ; — 
It  was  he  that  fused,  and  smoothly  formed, 
It  was  he  that  fashioned  the  tathlum. 

"  To  the  hero  Lugh  was  given 
This  concrete  ball, — no  soft  missile; — 
In  Mag  Tuireadh  of  shrieking  wails. 
From  his  hand  he  threw  the  tathlum."  ^ 

This  blinding  of  the  terrible  Balor  turned  the  for- 
tunes of  the  fight;  for  the  Fomors  wavered,  and  the 
Morrfgu  came  and  encouraged  the  people  of  the 
goddess  Danu  with  a  song,  beginning  "  Kings  arise 
to  the  battle",  so  that  they  took  fresh  heart,  and 
drove  the  Fomors  headlong  back  to  their  country 
underneath  the  sea. 

Such  was  the  battle  which  is  called  in  Irish 
Mag  Tuireadh  na  b-Fomorach,  that  is  to  say,  the 

^  This  translation  was  made  by  Eugene  O'Curry  from  an  ancient  vellum  MS. 
formerly  belonging  to  Mr.  W.  Monck  Mason,  but  since  sold  by  auction  in  London. 
See  his  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  Lecture  XII,  p.  252. 

( B  219  ^  H 


114         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"Plain  of  the  Towers  of  the  Fomors",  and,  more 
popularly,  the  ''  Battle  of  Moytura  the  Northern",  to 
distinguish  it  from  the  other  Battle  of  Moytura 
fought  by  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  against  the  Fir 
Bolgs  farther  to  the  south.  More  of  the  Fomors 
were  killed  in  it,  says  the  ancient  manuscript,  than 
there  are  stars  in  the  sky,  grains  of  sand  on  the  sea- 
shore, snow-flakes  in  winter,  drops  of  dew  upon  the 
meadows  in  spring-time,  hailstones  during  a  storm, 
blades  of  grass  trodden  under  horses'  feet,  or  Man- 
ann^n  son  of  Ler's  white  horses,  the  waves  of  the 
sea,  when  a  tempest  breaks.  The  **  towers"  or 
pillars  said  to  mark  the  graves  of  the  combatants 
still  stand  upon  the  plain  of  Carrowmore,  near  Sligo, 
and  form,  in  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Petrie,  the  finest  col- 
lection of  prehistoric  monuments  in  the  world,  with 
the  sole  exception  of  Carnac,  in  Brittany.^  Mega- 
lithic  structures  of  almost  every  kind  are  found 
among  them — stone  cairns  with  dolmens  in  their 
interiors,  dolmens  standing  open  and  alone,  dolmens 
surrounded  by  one,  two,  or  three  circles  of  stones, 
and  circles  without  dolmens — to  the  number  of  over 
a  hundred.  Sixty-four  of  such  prehistoric  remains 
stand  together  upon  an  elevated  plateau  not  more 
than  a  mile  across,  and  make  the  battle-field  of  Moy- 
tura, though  the  least  known,  perhaps  the  most  im- 
pressive of  all  primeval  ruins.  What  they  really 
commemorated  we  may  never  know,  but,  in  all  pro- 
bability, the  place  was  the  scene  of  some  important 
and  decisive  early  battle,  the  monuments  marking 
the  graves  of  the  chieftains  who  were  interred  as  the 

^  See  Fergusson :  Rude  Stone  Monuments,  pp.  i8o,  &c. 


o 


O 

< 


o 

H 

O 
I— I 

C/2 


/ 


The   War  with  the  Giants  115 

result  of  it  Those  which  have  been  examined  were 
found  to  contain  burnt  wood  and  the  half-burnt  bones 
of  men  and  horses,  as  well  as  implements  of  flint  and 
bone.  The  cfctors,  therefore,  were  still  in  the  Neo- 
lithic Age.  Whether  the  horses  were  domesticated 
ones  buried  with  their  riders,  or  wild  ones  eaten  at 
the  funeral  feasts,  it  would  be  hard  to  decide.  The 
history  of  the  real  event  must  have  been  long 
lost  even  at  the  early  date  when  its  relics  were 
pointed  out  as  the  records  of  a  battle  between  the 
gods  and  the  giants  of  Gaelic  myth. 

The  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  following  the  routed 
Fomors,  overtook  and  captured  Bress.  He  begged 
Lugh  to  spare  his  life. 

"What  ransom  will  you  pay  for  it?"  asked 
Lugh. 

"  I  will  guarantee  that  the  cows  of  Ireland  shall 
always  be  in  milk,"  promised  Bress. 

But,  before  accepting,  Lugh  took  counsel  with  his 
druids. 

**  What  good  will  that  be,"  they  decided,  ''  if  Bress 
does  not  also  lengthen  the  lives  of  the  cows.f^" 

This  was  beyond  the  power  of  Bress  to  do;  so  he 
made  another  offer. 

"Tell  your  people,"  he  said  to  Lugh,  "that,  if 
they  will  spare  my  life,  they  shall  have  a  good  wheat 
harvest  every  year." 

But  they  said:  "We  already  have  the  spring  to 
plough  and  sow  in,  the  summer  to  ripen  the  crops, 
the  autumn  for  reaping,  and  the  winter  in  which  to 
eat  the  bread;  and  that  is  all  we  want." 

Lugh  told  this  to  Bress.     But  he  also  said:  "You 


ii6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

shall  have  your  life  in  return  for  a  much  less  service 
to  us  than  that." 

''What  is  it?"  asked  Bress. 

**  Tell  us  when  we  ought  to  plough,  when  we 
ought  to  sow,  and  when  we  ought  to  harvest." 

Bress  replied:  ''  You  should  plough  on  a  Tuesday, 
sow  on  a  Tuesday,  and  harvest  on  a  Tuesday." 

And  this  lying  maxim  (says  the  story)  saved 
Bress  s  life. 

Lugh,  the  Dagda,  and  Ogma  still  pursued  the 
Fomors,  who  had  carried  off  in  their  flight  the  Dag- 
da s  harp.  They  followed  them  into  the  submarine 
palace  where  Bress  and  Elathan  lived,  and  there 
they  saw  the  harp  hanging  on  the  wall.  This  harp 
of  the  Dagda's  would  not  play  without  its  owner's 
leave.     The  Dagda  sang  to  it: 

"  Come,  oak  of  the  two  cries ! 
Come,  hand  of  fourfold  music ! 
Come,  summer!     Come,  winter! 
Voice  of  harps,  bellows^,  and  flutes!" 

For  the  Dagda's  harp  had  these  two  names;  it  was 
called  *' Oak  of  the  two  cries"  and  **  Hand  of  four- 
fold music". 

It  leaped  down  from  the  wall,  killing  nine  of  the 
Fomors  as  it  passed,  and  came  into  the  Dagda's 
hand.  The  Dagda  played  to  the  Fomors  the  three 
tunes  known  to  all  clever  harpists — the  weeping- 
tune,  the  laughing -tune,  and  the  sleeping -tune. 
While  he  played  the  weeping-tune,  they  were  bowed 
with  weeping;    while  he  played  the  laughing-tune, 

1  ?  Bagpipes. 


The    War  with  the  Giants  117 

they  rocked  with  laughter;  and  when  he  played  the 
sleeping-tune,  they  all  fell  asleep.  And  while  they 
slept,  Lugh,  the  Dagda,  and  Ogma  got  away  safely. 

Next,  the  Dagda  brought  the  black-maned  heifer 
which  he  had,  by  the  advice  of  Angus  son  of  the 
Young,  obtained  from  Bress.  The  wisdom  of  Angus 
had  been  shown  in  this  advice,  for  it  was  this  very 
heifer  that  the  cattle  of  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  were  accustomed  to  follow,  whenever  it  lowed. 
Now,  when  it  lowed,  all  the  cattle  which  the  Fomors 
had  taken  away  from  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  came 
back  again. 

Yet  the  power  of  the  Fomors  was  not  wholly 
broken.  Four  of  them  still  carried  on  a  desultory 
warfare  by  spoiling  the  corn,  fruit,  and  milk  of  their 
conquerors.  But  the  Morrigii  and  Badb  and  Mider 
and  Angus  pursued  them,  and  drove  them  out  of 
Ireland  for  ever.^ 

Last  of  all,  the  Morrigii  and  Badb  went  up  on  to 

the  summits  of  all  the  high  mountains  of  Ireland, 

and  proclaimed  the  victory.      All  the  lesser  gods 

who  had  not  been  in  the  battle  came  round  and 

heard  the  news.      And   Badb  sang  a  song  which 

began : 

"  Peace  mounts  to  the  heavens, 
The  heavens  descend  to  earth, 
Earth  lies  under  the  heavens, 
Everyone  is  strong  .  .  .", 

but  the  rest  of  it  has  been  lost  and  forgotten. 

Then  she  added  a  prophecy  in  which  she  foretold 

'^Book  of  Fermoy.    See  Revue  Celtique,  Vol.  I.— "The  Ancient  Irish  Goddess 
of  Wa»". 


r  1 8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  approaching  end  of  the  divine  age,  and  the 
beginning  of  a  new  one  in  which  summers  would 
be  flowerless  and  cows  milkless  and  women  shame- 
less and  men  strengthless,  in  which  there  would  be 
trees  without  fruit  and  seas  without  fish,  when  old 
men  would  give  false  judgments  and  legislators 
make  unjust  laws,  when  warriors  would  betray  one 
another,  and  men  would  be  thieves,  and  there  would 
be  no  more  virtue  left  in  the  world. 


CHAPTER  X 

THE  CONQUEST  OF  THE  GODS  BY  MORTALS 

Of  what  Badb  had  in  mind  when  she  uttered 
this  prophecy  we  have  no  record.  But  it  was  true. 
The  twilight  of  the  Irish  gods  was  at  hand.  A 
new  race  was  coming  across  the  sea  to  dispute  the 
ownership  of  Ireland  with  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu.  And  these  new-comers  were  not  divinities 
like  themselves,  but  men  like  ourselves,  ancestors 
of  the  Gaels. 

This  story  of  the  conquest  of  the  gods  by  mortals 
— which  seems  such  a  strange  one  to  us — is  typi- 
cally Celtic.  The  Gaelic  mythology  is  the  only  one 
which  has  preserved  it  in  any  detail;  but  the  doc- 
trine would  seem  to  have  been  common  at  one  time 
to  all  the  Celts.  It  was,  however,  of  less  shame  to 
the  gods  than  would  otherwise  have  been;  for  men 
were  of  as  divine  descent  as  themselves.  The 
dogma  of  the  Celts  was  that  men  were  descended 
from  the  god  of  death,  and  first  came  from  the 
Land  of  the  Dead  to  take  possession  of  the  present 
world.  ^  Caesar  tells  us,  in  his  too  short  account  of 
the    Gauls,    that    they    believed    themselves   to   be 

^  It  may  be  noted  that,  according  to  Welsh  legend,  the  ancestors  of  the  Cymn 
came  from  Gwlid  yr  H4v,  the  "  Land  of  Summer",  i.e.  the  Celtic  Other  World. 

119 


1 20         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

sprung  from  Dis  Pater,  the  god  of  the  underworld.^ 
In  the  Gaelic  mythology  Dis  Pater  was  called  Bile, 
a  name  which  has  for  root  the  syllable  bel,  meaning 
**  to  die  ".  The  god  Beli  in  British  mythology  was 
no  doubt  the  same  person,  while  the  same  idea  is 
expressed  by  the  same  root  in  the  name  of  Balor, 
the  terrible  Fomor  whose  glance  was  death.^ 

The  post-Christian  Irish  chroniclers,  seeking  to 
reconcile  Christian  teachings  with  the  still  vital 
pagan  mythology  by  changing  the  gods  into  ancient 
kings  and  incorporating  them  into  the  annals  of  the 
country,  with  appropriate  dates,  also  disposed  of  the 
genuine  early  doctrine  by  substituting  Spain  for 
Hades,  and  giving  a  highly-fanciful  account  of  the 
origin  and  wanderings  of  their  ancestors.  To  use 
a  Hibernicism,  appropriate  in  this  connection,  the 
first  Irishman  was  a  Scythian  called  Fenius  Farsa. 
Deprived  of  his  own  throne,  he  had  settled  in 
Egypt,  where  his  son  Niul  married  a  daughter  of 
the  reigning  Pharaoh.  Her  name  was  Scota,  and 
she  had  a  son  called  Goidel,  whose  great-grandson 
was  named  Eber  Scot,  the  whole  genealogy  being 
probably  invented  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  three 
names  by  which  the  Gaels  called  themselves — Finn, 
Scot,  and  Goidel.  Fenius  and  his  family  and  clan 
were  turned  out  of  Egypt  for  refusing  to  join  in  the 
persecution  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  sojourned 
in  Africa  for  forty-two  years.  Their  wanderings 
took  them  to  **the  altars  of  the  Philistines,  by  the 


1  De  Bello  Gallico^  Book  VI,  chap,  xviii. 

'^ De  Jubainville :  Cycle  Mythologique,  chap.  X.     Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures — "The 
Gaulish  Pantheon". 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     121 

Lake  of  Osiers " ;  then,  passing  between  Rusicada 
and  the  hilly  country  of  Syria,  they  travelled 
through  Mauretania  as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Her- 
cules; and  thence  landed  in  Spain,  where  they  lived 
many  years,  greatly  increasing  and  multiplying. 
The  same  route  is  given  by  the  twelfth-century 
British  historian,  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  as  that 
taken  by  Brutus  and  the  Trojans  when  they  came 
to  colonize  Britain.^  Its  only  connection  with  any 
kind  of  fact  is  that  it  corresponds  fairly  well  with 
what  ethnologists  consider  must  have  been  the 
westward  line  of  migration  taken,  not,  curiously 
enough,  by  the  Aryan  Celts,  but  by  the  pre -Aryan 
Iberians. 

It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  find  the  first  men  in 
Spain,  remembering  that  **  Spain "  stood  for  the 
Celtic  Hades,  or  Elysium.  In  this  country  Bregon, 
the  father  of  two  sons,  Bile  and  Ith,  had  built  a 
watch-tower,  from  which,  one  winter's  evening,  Ith 
saw,  far  off  over  the  seas,  a  land  he  had  never 
noticed  before.  "It  is  on  winter  evenings,  when 
the  air  is  pure,  that  man  s  eyesight  reaches 
farthest ",  remarks  the  old  tract  called  the  **  Book 
of  Invasions  ",^  gravely  accounting  for  the  fact  that 
Ith  saw  Ireland  from  Spain. 

Wishing  to  examine  it  nearer,  he  set  sail  with 
thrice  thirty  warriors,  and  landed  without  mishap  at 
the  mouth  of  the  River  Scene.^  The  country  seemed 
to  him  to  be  uninhabited,  and  he  marched  with  his 


1  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  Historia  Britonum,  Book  I,  chap.  Ii. 
'  Contained  in  the  Book  of  Leinster  and  other  ancient  manuscripts. 
3  Now  called  the  Kenmare  River. 


122         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

men  towards  the  north.  At  last  he  reached  Aileach, 
near  the  present  town  of  Londonderry. 

Here  he  found  the  three  reigning  kings  of  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu,  Mac  Cuill,  Mac  Cecht, 
and  Mac  Grein6,  the  sons  of  Ogma,  and  grandsons 
of  the  Dagda.  These  had  succeeded  Nuada  the 
Silver-handed,  killed  in  the  battle  with  the  Fomors; 
and  had  met,  after  burying  their  predecessor  in  a 
tumulus  called  Grianan  Aileach,  which  still  stands 
on  the  base  of  the  Inishowen  Peninsula,  between 
Lough  Swilly  and  Lough  Foyle,  to  divide  his  king- 
dom among  them.  Unable  to  arrive  at  any  parti- 
tion satisfactory  to  all,  they  appealed  to  the  new- 
comer to  arbitrate. 

The  advice  of  Ith  was  moral  rather  than  practical. 
"  Act  according  to  the  laws  of  justice  "  was  all  that 
he  would  say  to  the  claimants;  and  then  he  was 
indiscreet  enough  to  burst  into  enthusiastic  praises 
of  Ireland  for  its  temperate  climate  and  its  richness 
in  fruit,  honey,  wheat,  and  fish.  Such  sentiments 
from  a  foreigner  seemed  to  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann 
suggestive  of  a  desire  to  take  the  country  from 
them.  They  conspired  together  and  treacherously 
killed  Ith  at  a  place  since  called  '' Ith's  Plain". 
They,  however,  spared  his  followers,  who  returned 
to  **  Spain ",  taking  their  dead  leader's  body  with 
them.  The  indignation  there  was  great,  and  Mil6, 
Bilds  son  and  Ith's  nephew,  determined  to  go  to 
Ireland  and  get  revenge. 

Mil6  therefore  sailed  with  his  eight  sons  and 
their  wives.  Thirty-six  chiefs,  each  with  his  shipful 
of  warriors,  accompanied  him.      By  the  magic  arts 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     123 

of  their  druid,  Amergin  of  the  Fair  Knee,  they 
discovered  the  exact  place  at  which  Ith  had  landed 
before  them,  and  put  in  to  shore  there.  Two  alone 
failed  to  reach  it  alive.  The  wife  of  Amergin  died 
during  the  voyage,  and  Aranon,  a  son  of  Mile,  on 
approaching  the  land,  climbed  to  the  top  of  the 
mast  to  obtain  a  better  view,  and,  falling  off,  was 
drowned.  The  rest  disembarked  safely  upon  the 
first  of  May. 

Amergin  was  the  first  to  land.  Planting  his  right 
foot  on  Irish  soil,  he  burst  into  a  poem  preserved  in 
both  the  Book  of  Lecan  and  the  Book  of  Ballymote.^ 
It  is  a  good  example  of  the  pantheistic  philosophy 
of  the  Celtic  races,  and  a  very  close  parallel  to  it 
is  contained  in  an  early  Welsh  poem,  called  the 
**  Battle  of  the  Trees  ",  and  attributed  to  the  famous 
bard  Taliesin.^  *'  I  am  the  wind  that  blows  upon 
the  sea,"  sang  Amergin;  **  I  am  the  ocean  wave;  I 
am  the  murmur  of  the  surges;  I  am  seven  bat- 
talions; I  am  a  strong  bull;  I  am  an  eagle  on  a 
rock ;  I  am  a  ray  of  the  sun ;  I  am  the  most  beauti- 
ful of  herbs;  I  am  a  courageous  wild  boar;  I  am  a 
salmon  in  the  water;  I  am  a  lake  upon  a  plain;  I 
am  a  cunning  artist ;  I  am  a  gigantic,  sword-wielding 
champion;  I  can  shift  my  shape  like  a  god.  In 
what  direction  shall  we  go?  Shall  we  hold  our 
council  in  the  valley  or  on  the  mountain  -  top  ? 
Where  shall  we  make  our  home?  What  land  is 
better  than  this  island  of  the  setting  sun?     Where 

1  This  poem  and  the  three  following  ones,  all  attributed  to  Amergin,  are  said  to 
be  the  oldest  Irish  literary  records, 

'-^  Book  of  Taliesin,  poem  viii,  in  Skene's  Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,  Vol.  I, 
p.  276. 


124         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

shall  we  walk  to  and  fro  in  peace  and  safety? 
Who  can  find  you  clear  springs  of  water  as  I  can? 
Who  can  tell  you  the  age  of  the  moon  but  I  ?  Who 
can  call  the  fish  from  the  depths  of  the  sea  as  I 
can?  Who  can  cause  them  to  come  near  the  shore 
as  I  can?  Who  can  change  the  shapes  of  the  hills 
and  headlands  as  I  can?  I  am  a  bard  who  is  called 
upon  by  seafarers  to  prophesy.  Javelins  shall  be 
wielded  to  avenge  our  wrongs.  I  prophesy  victory. 
I  end  my  song  by  prophesying  all  other  good 
things."^ 

The  Welsh  bard  Taliesin  sings  in  the  same  strain 
as  the  druid  Amergin  his  unity  with,  and  therefore 
his  power  over,  all  nature,  animate  and  inanimate. 
**  I  have  been  in  many  shapes",  he  says,  **  before  I 
attained  a  congenial  form.  I  have  been  a  narrow 
blade  of  a  sword;  I  have  been  a  drop  in  the  air; 
I  have  been  a  shining  star;  I  have  been  a  word 
in  a  book;  I  have  been  a  book  in  the  beginning; 
I  have  been  a  light  in  a  lantern  a  year  and  a  half; 
I  have  been  a  bridge  for  passing  over  threescorje 
rivers;  I  have  journeyed  as  an  eagle;  I  have  been 
a  boat  on  the  sea;  I  have  been  a  director  in  battle; 
I  have  been  a  sword  in  the  hand;  I  have  been  a 
shield  in  fight;  I  have  been  the  string  of  a  harp; 
I  have  been  enchanted  for  a  year  in  the  foam  of 
water.  There  is  nothing  in  which  I  have  not  been." 
It  is  strange  to  find  Gael  and  Briton  combining  to 
voice  almost  in  the  same  words  this  doctrine  of  the 
mystical  Celts,  who,  while  still  in  a  state  of  semi- 

1  De  Jubainville:  Cycle  Mythologique.    See  also  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic 
Society,  Vol.  V. 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     125 

barbarism,  saw,  with  some  of  the  greatest  of  ancient 
and  modern  philosophers,  the  One  in  the  Many,  and 
a  single  Essence  in  all  the  manifold  forms  of  life. 

The  Milesians  (for  so,  following  the  Irish  annal- 
ists, it  will  be  convenient  to  call  the  first  Gaelic 
settlers  in  Ireland)  began  their  march  on  Tara, 
which  was  the  capital  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann, 
as  it  had  been  in  earlier  days  the  chief  fortress  of 
the  Fir  Bolgs,  and  would  in  later  days  be  the 
dwelling  of  the  high  kings  of  Ireland.  On  their 
way  they  met  with  a  goddess  called  Banba,  the 
wife  of  Mac  Cuill.  She  greeted  Amergin.  **  If 
you  have  come  to  conquer  Ireland,"  she  said, 
"your  cause  is  no  just  one."  **  Certainly  it  is  to 
conquer  it  we  have  come,"  replied  Amergin,  with- 
out condescending  to  argue  upon  the  abstract 
morality  of  the  matter.  **  Then  at  least  grant  me 
one  thing,"  she  asked.  **What  is  that?"  replied 
Amergin.  **  That  this  island  shall  be  called  by 
my  name."     **  It  shall  be,"  replied  Amergin. 

A  little  farther  on,  they  met  a  second  goddess, 
Fotla,  the  wife  of  Mac  Cecht,  who  made  the  same 
request,  and  received  the  same  answer  from  Amer- 
gin. 

Last  of  all,  at  Uisnech,  the  centre  of  Ireland, 
they  came  upon  the  third  of  the  queens,  Eriu,  the 
wife  of  Mac  Grein6.  **  Welcome,  warriors,"  she 
cried.  "  To  you  who  have  come  from  afar  this 
island  shall  henceforth  belong,  and  from  the  setting 
to  the  rising  sun  there  is  no  better  land.  And  your 
race  will  be  the  most  perfect  the  world  has  ever 
seen."      "These  are   fair  words  and  a  good  pro- 


126         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

phecy,"  said  Amergin.  **  It  will  be  no  thanks  to 
you,"  broke  in  Donn,  Mile's  eldest  son.  '* Whatever 
success  we  have  we  shall  owe  to  our  own  strength." 
''  That  which  I  prophesy  has  no  concern  with  you," 
retorted  the  goddess,  ""  and  neither  you  nor  your 
descendants  will  live  to  enjoy  this  island."  Then, 
turning  to  Amergin,  she,  too,  asked  that  Ireland 
might  be  called  after  her.  ''It  shall  be  its  principal 
name,"  Amergin  promised. 

And  so  it  has  happened.  Of  the  three  ancient 
names  of  Ireland — Banba,  Fotla,  and  Eriu — the 
last,  in  its  genitive  form  of  '*  Erinn ",  is  the  one 
that  has  survived. 

The  invaders  came  to  Tara,  then  called  Drum- 
cain,  that  is,  the  ''  Beautiful  Hill ".  Mac  Cuill, 
Mac  Cecht,  and  Mac  Grein6  met  them,  with  all 
the  host  of  the  Gaelic  gods.  As  was  usual,  they 
held  a  parley.  The  people  of  the  goddess  Danu 
complained  that  they  had  been  taken  by  surprise, 
and  the  Milesians  admitted  that  to  invade  a  country 
without  having  first  warned  its  inhabitants  was  not 
strictly  according  to  the  courtesies  of  chivalrous 
warfare.  The  Tuatha  D6  Danann  proposed  to 
the  invaders  that  they  should  leave  the  island  for 
three  days,  during  which  they  themselves  would 
decide  whether  to  fight  for  their  kingdom  or  to 
surrender  it;  but  the  Milesians  did  not  care  for 
this,  for  they  knew  that,  as  soon  as  they  were  out 
of  the  island,  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  would  oppose 
them  with  druidical  enchantments,  so  that  they 
would  not  be  able  to  make  a  fresh  landing.  In 
the  end,   Mac  Cuill,   Mac  Cecht,  and   Mac   Grein6 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     127 

offered  to  submit  the  matter  to  the  arbitration  of 
Amergin,  the  Milesians'  own  lawgiver,  with  the 
express  stipulation  that,  if  he  gave  an  obviously- 
partial  judgment,  he  was  to  suffer  death  at  their 
hands.  Donn  asked  his  druid  if  he  were  prepared 
to  accept  this  very  delicate  duty.  Amergin  replied 
that  he  was,  and  at  once  delivered  the  first  judg- 
ment pronounced  by  the  Milesians  in  Ireland. 

"  The  men  whom  we  found  dwelling  in  the  land,  to  them  is 

possession  due  by  right. 
It  is  therefore  your  duty  to  set  out  to  sea  over  nine  green 

waves ; 
And  if  you  shall  be  able  to  effect  a  landing  again  in  spite 

of  them. 
You  are  to  engage  them  in  battle,  and  I  adjudge  to  you 

the  land  in  which  you  found  them  living. 
I  adjudge  to  you  the  land  wherein  you  found  them  dwell- 
ing, by  the  right  of  battle. 
But  although  you  may  desire  the  land  which  these  people 

possess,  yet  yours  is  the  duty  to  show  them  justice. 
I  forbid  you  from  injustice  to  those  you  have  found  in 

the  land,  however  you  may  desire  to  obtain  it."^ 

This  judgment  was  considered  fair  by  both  parties. 
The  Milesians  retired  to  their  ships,  and  waited  at 
a  distance  of  nine  waves'  length  from  the  land  until 
the  signal  was  given  to  attack,  while  the  Tuatha 
De  Danann,  drawn  up  upon  the  beach,  were  ready 
with  their  druidical  spells  to  oppose  them. 

The  signal  was  given,  and  the  Milesians  bent  to 
their  oars.  But  they  had  hardly  started  before  they 
discovered  that  a  strong  wind  was  blowing  straight 

1  Translated  by  Professor  Owen  Connellan  in  Vol.  V  of  the  Transactions  of  the 
Ossianic  Society, 


1 28         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

towards  them  from  the  shore,  so  that  they  could 
make  no  progress.  At  first  they  thought  it  might  be 
a  natural  breeze,  but  Donn  smelt  magic  in  it.  He 
sent  a  man  to  climb  the  mast  of  his  ship,  and  see 
if  the  wind  blew  as  strong  at  that  height  as  it  did 
at  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  man  returned,  report- 
ing that  the  air  was  quite  still  ''up  aloft".  Evi- 
dently it  was  a  druidical  wind.  But  Amergin  soon 
coped  with  it.  Lifting  up  his  voice,  he  invoked 
the  Land  of  Ireland  itself,  a  power  higher  than  the 
gods  it  sheltered. 

"  I  invoke  the  land  of  Eriu ! 
The  shining,  shining  sea! 
The  fertile,  fertile  hill! 
The  wooded  vale! 

The  river  abundant,  abundant  in  water! 
The  fishful,  fishful  lake!" 

In  such  strain  runs  the  original  incantation,  one 
of  those  magic  formulas  whose  power  was  held  by 
ancient,  and  still  is  held  by  savage,  races  to  reside 
in  their  exact  consecrated  wording  rather  than  in 
their  meaning.  To  us  it  sounds  nonsense,  and  so 
no  doubt  it  did  to  those  who  put  the  old  Irish 
mythical  traditions  into  literary  shape;  for  a  later 
version  expands  and  explains  it  as  follows:^ — 

"  I  implore  that  we  may  regain  the  land  of  Erin, 
We  who  have  come  over  the  lofty  waves, 

1  The  original  versions  of  this  and  the  following  charm  are  from  De  Jubainville : 
Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais,  the  later  from  Professor  Owen  Connellan's  trans- 
lations in  Vol.  V  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society.  "Some  of  these 
poems",  explains  the  Professor,  "have  been  glossed  by  writers  or  commentators 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  without  which  it  would  be  almost  impossible  now  for  any  Irish 
scholar  to  interpret  them ;  and  it  is  proper  to  remark  that  the  translation  accom- 
oanying  them  is  more  in  accordance  with  this  gloss  than  with  the  original  text." 


LUGH'S    MAGIC    SPEAR 
From  the  Draiving  by  H.  R,  Millar 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     1 29 

This  land  whose  mountains  are  great  and  extensive, 

Whose  streams  are  clear  and  numerous, 

Whose  woods  abound  with  various  fruit, 

Its  rivers  and  waterfalls  are  large  and  beautiful, 

Its  lakes  are  broad  and  widely  spread. 

It  abounds  with  fountains  on  elevated  grounds! 

May  we  gain  power  and  dominion  over  its  tribes! 

May  we  have  kings  of  our  own  ruling  at  Tara! 

May  Tara  be  the  regal  residence  of  our  many  succeeding 

kings ! 
May  the  Milesians  be  the  conquerors  of  its  people! 
May  our  ships  anchor  in  its  harbours! 
May  they  trade  along  the  coast  of  Erin! 
May  Eremon  be  its  first  ruling  monarch! 
May  the  descendants  of  Ir  and  Eber  be  mighty  kings! 
I  implore  that  we  may  regain  the  land  of  Erin, 

I  implore!" 


The  incantation  proved  effectual.  The  Land  of 
Ireland  v^^as  pleased  to  be  propitious,  and  the 
druidical  wind  dropped  down. 

But  success  was  not  quite  so  easy  as  they  had 
hoped.  Mananndn,  son  of  the  sea  and  lord  of 
headlands,  shook  his  magic  mantle  at  them,  and 
hurled  a  fresh  tempest  out  over  the  deep.  The 
galleys  of  the  Milesians  were  tossed  helplessly  on 
the  waves;  many  sank  with  their  crews.  Donn 
was  among  the  lost,  thus  fulfilling  Eriu  s  prophecy, 
and  three  other  sons  of  MiI6  also  perished.  In  the 
end,  a  broken  remnant,  after  long  beating  about  the 
coasts,  came  to  shore  at  the  mouth  of  the  River 
Boyne.  They  landed;  and  Amergin,  from  the 
shore,  invoked  the  aid  of  the  sea  as  he  had  al- 
ready done  that  of  the  land. 

(B219)  I 


130         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"Sea  full  offish! 
Fertile  land! 
Fish  swarming  up! 
Fish  there! 
Under- wave  bird! 
Great  fish! 
Crab's  hole! 
Fish  swarming  up! 
Sea  full  of  fish!" 


which,  being  interpreted  like  the  preceding  charm, 
seems  to  have  meant: 

**  May  the  fishes  of  the  sea  crowd  in  shoals  to  the  land  for 
our  use! 

May  the  waves  of  the  sea  drive  forth  to  the  shore  abun- 
dance offish! 

May  the  salmon  swim  abundantly  into  our  nets! 

May  all  kinds  of  fish  come  plentifully  to  us  from  the  sea! 

May  its  flat-fishes  also  come  in  abundance! 

This  poem  I  compose  at  the  sea-shore  that  fishes  may 
swim  in  shoals  to  our  coast." 

Then,  gathering  their  forces,  they  marched  on  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu. 

Two  battles  were  fought,  the  first  in  Glenn  Faisi, 
a  valley  of  the  Slieve  Mish  Mountains,  south  of 
Tralee,  and  the  second  at  Tailtiu,  now  called  Tell- 
town.  In  both,  the  gods  were  beaten.  Their 
three  kings  were  killed  by  the  three  surviving 
sons  of  Mil6 — Mac  Cuill  by  Eber,  Mac  Cecht  by 
Eremon,  and  Mac  Grein6  by  the  druid  Amergin. 
Defeated  and  disheartened,  they  gave  in,  and,  re- 
tiring beneath  the  earth,  left  the  surface  of  the  land 
to  their  conquerors. 


The  Conquest  of  the  Gods  by  Mortals     131 

From  this  day  begins  the  history  of  Ireland 
according  to  the  annalists.  Mill's  eldest  son,  Donn, 
having  perished,  the  kingdom  fell  by  right  to  the 
second,  Eremon.  But  Eber,  the  third  son,  backed 
by  his  followers,  insisted  upon  a  partition,  and  Ire- 
land was  divided  into  two  equal  parts.  At  the  end 
of  a  year,  however,  war  broke  out  between  the 
brothers;  Eber  was  killed  in  battle,  and  Eremon 
took  the  sole  rule. 


CHAPTER   XI 

THE    GODS    IN    EXILE 

But  though  mortals  had  conquered  gods  upon  a 
scale  unparalleled  in  mythology,  they  had  by  no 
means  entirely  subdued  them.  Beaten  in  battle, 
the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu  had  yet  not  lost 
their  divine  attributes,  and  could  use  them  either 
to  help  or  hurt.  "  Great  was  the  power  of  the 
Dagda",  says  a  tract  preserved  in  the  Book  of 
Leinster,  ''over  the  sons  of  Mil6,  even  after  the 
conquest  of  Ireland;  for  his  subjects  destroyed  their 
corn  and  milk,  so  that  they  must  needs  make  a 
treaty  of  peace  with  the  Dagda.  Not  until  then, 
and  thanks  to  his  good-will,  were  they  able  to 
harvest  corn  and  drink  the  milk  of  their  cows."^ 
The  basis  of  this  lost  treaty  seems  to  have  been 
that  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  though  driven  from 
the  soil,  should  receive  homage  and  offerings  from 
their  successors.  We  are  told  in  the  verse  dinn- 
senchus  of  Mag  Slecht,  that — 

"  Since  the  rule 
Of  Eremon,  the  noble  man  of  grace, 
There  was  worshipping  of  stones 
Until  the  coming  of  good  Patrick  of  Macha".^ 

*  De  Jubainville :  Cycle  My  thologique  Irian  dais,  p.  269. 
2  See  chap,  iv — "  The  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Britons  and  Druidism  ". 

132 


The  Gods  in  Exile  133 

Dispossessed  of  upper  earth,  the  gods  had,  how- 
ever, to  seek  for  new  homes.  A  council  was  con- 
vened, but  its  members  were  divided  between  two 
opinions.  One  section  of  them  chose  to  shake  the 
dust  of  Ireland  off  its  disinherited  feet,  and  seek 
refuge  in  a  paradise  over-seas,  situate  in  some  un- 
known, and,  except  for  favoured  mortals,  unknow- 
able island  of  the  west,  the  counterpart  in  Gaelic 
myth  of  the  British 

..."  island-valley  of  Avilion ; 
Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow, 
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly ;  but  it  lies 
Deep-meadow'd,  happy,  fair  with  orchard-lawns 
And  bowery  hollows  crown'd  with  summer  sea  "  ^ 


— a  land  of  perpetual  pleasure  and  feasting,  described 
variously  as  the  ''Land  of  Promise"  {Tir  TairngirS\ 
the  *'  Plain  of  Happiness  "  {Mag  Melt),  the  ''  Land 
of  the  Living"  {Tir-nam-beo),  the  ''Land  of  the 
Young"  (Tir-nan-dg\  and  "  Breasals  Island"  {Hy- 
Breasail),  Celtic  mythology  is  full  of  the  beauties 
and  wonders  of  this  mystic  country,  and  the  tradition 
of  it  has  never  died  out.  Hy-Breasail  has  been  set 
down  on  old  maps  as  a  reality  again  and  again  ;^ 
some  pioneers  in  the  Spanish  seas  thought  they 
had  discovered  it,  and  called  the  land  they  found 
"Brazil";  and  it  is  still  said,  by  lovers  of  old  lore, 
that  a  patient  watcher,  after  long  gazing  westward 
from  the  westernmost  shores  of  Ireland  or  Scotland, 


1  Tennyson :  Idylls  of  the  King:  The  Passing  of  Arthur. 

2  See  Wood-Martin:   Traces  of  the  Elder  Faiths  of  Ireland,  Vol  I,  pp.  213-215. 


134         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

may  sometimes  be  lucky  enough  to  catch  a  glimpse 
against  the  sunset  of  its — 

"  summer  isles  of  Eden  lying  in  dark-purple  spheres  of  sea  ". 

Of  these  divine  emigrants  the  principal  was 
Mananndn  son  of  Ler.  But,  though  he  had  cast 
in  his  lot  beyond  the  seas,  he  did  not  cease  to  visit 
Ireland.  An  old  Irish  king.  Bran,  the  son  of  Febal, 
met  him,  according  to  a  seventh-century  poem,  as 
Bran  journeyed  to,  and  Manannan  from,  the  earthly 
paradise.  Bran  was  in  his  boat,  and  Mananndn 
was  driving  a  chariot  over  the  tops  of  the  waves, 
and  he  sang:^ 

"  Bran  deems  it  a  marvellous  beauty 
In  his  coracle  across  the  clear  sea: 
While  to  me  in  my  chariot  from  afar 
It  is  a  flowery  plain  on  which  he  rides  about. 

"  What  is  a  clear  sea 
For  the  prowed  skiff  in  which  Bran  is. 
That  is  a  happy  plain  with  profusion  of  flowers 
To  me  from  the  chariot  of  two  wheels. 

"  Bran  sees 
The  number  of  waves  beating  across  the  clear  sea : 
I  myself  see  in  Mag  Mon^ 
Red-headed  flowers  without  fault. 

"  Sea-horses  glisten  in  summer 
As  far  as  Bran  has  stretched  his  glance: 
Rivers  pour  forth  a  stream  of  honey 
In  the  land  of  Manannan  son  of  Ler. 

1  The  following  verses  are  taken  from  Dr.  Kuno  Meyer's  translation  of  the 
romance  entitled  The  Voyage  of  Bran,  Son  of  Febal,  published  in  Mr.  Nutt's 
Grimm  Library,  Vol.  IV.  *  The  Plain  of  Sp^orts. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  135 

"  The  sheen  of  the  main,  on  which  thou  art, 
The  white  hue  of  the  sea,  on  which  thou  rowest  about, 
Yellow  and  azure  are  spread  out, 
It  is  land,  and  is  not  rough. 

"  Speckled  salmon  leap  from  the  womb 
Of  the  white  sea,  on  which  thou  lookest: 
They  are  calves,  they  are  coloured  lambs 
With  friendliness,  without  mutual  slaughter. 

"  Though  but  one  chariot-rider  is  seen 
In  Mag  MelP  of  many  flowers. 
There  are  many  steeds  on  its  surface, 
Though  them  thou  seest  not. 


"  Along  the  top  of  a  wood  has  swum 
Thy  coracle  across  ridges. 
There  is  a  wood  of  beautiful  fruit 
Under  the  prow  of  thy  little  skiff. 

"  A  wood  with  blossom  and  fruit. 
On  which  is  the  vine's  veritable  fragrance ; 
A  wood  without  decay,  without  defect. 
On  which  are  leaves  of  a  golden  hue." 

And,  after  this  singularly  poetical  enunciation  of  the 
philosophical  and  mystical  doctrine  that  all  things 
are,  under  their  diverse  forms,  essentially  the  same, 
he  goes  on  to  describe  to  Bran  the  beauties  and  plea- 
sures of  the  Celtic  Elysium. 

But  there  were  others — indeed,  the  most  part — of 
the  gods  who  refused  to  expatriate  themselves.  For 
these  residences  had  to  be  found,  and  the  Dagda, 
their  new  king,  proceeded  to  assign  to  each  of  those 
who  stayed  in  Ireland  a  sidh.  These  sidhe  were 
barrows,  or  hillocks,  each  being  the  door  to  an  under- 

^  The  Happy  Plain. 


136         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

ground  realm  of  inexhaustible  splendour  and  delight, 
according  to  the  somewhat  primitive  ideas  of  the 
Celts.  A  description  is  given  of  one  which  the 
Dagda  kept  for  himself,  and  out  of  which  his  son 
Angus  cheated  him,  which  will  serve  as  a  fair  ex- 
ample of  all.  There  were  apple-trees  there  always 
in  fruit,  and  one  pig  alive  and  another  ready  roasted, 
and  the  supply  of  ale  never  failed.  One  may  still 
visit  in  Ireland  the  sidhe  of  many  of  the  gods,  for 
the  spots  are  known,  and  the  traditions  have  not 
died  out.  To  L^r  was  given  Sidh  Fionnachaidh^ , 
now  known  as  the  ''Hill  of  the  White  Field  ",  on  the 
top  of  Slieve  Fuad,  near  Newtown  Hamilton,  in 
County  Armagh.  Bodb  Derg  received  a  sidh  called 
by  his  own  name,  Sidh  Bodb  ^^  just  to  the  south  of 
Portumna,  in  Gal  way.  Mider  was  given  the  sidh  of 
Bri  Leithy  now  called  Slieve  Golry,  near  Ardagh,  in 
County  Longford.  Ogma's  sidh  was  called  Airceltrai\ 
to  Lugh  was  assigned  Rodrubdn  ;  Mananndn's  son, 
Ilbhreach,  received  Sidh  Eas  Aedha  Ruaidh^,  now 
the  Mound  of  Mullachshee,  near  Ballyshannon, 
in  Donegal;  Fionnbharr*  had  Sidh  Meadha,  now 
"  Knockma  ",  about  five  miles  west  of  Tuam,  where, 
as  present  king  of  the  fairies,  he  is  said  to  live  to- 
day; while  the  abodes  of  other  gods  of  lesser  fame 
are  also  recorded.  For  himself  the  Dagda  retained 
two,  both  near  the  River  Boyne,  in  Meath,  the  best 
of  them  being  the  famous  Brugh-na- Boyne.  None 
of  the  members  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  were  left 
unprovided  for,  save  one. 

1  Pronounced  Sfue  Finneha.  '  Pronounced  Shee  Bove. 

3  Pronounced  Shee  Assaroe.  *  Pronounced  Finnvar. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  137 

It  was  from  this  time  that  the  Gaelic  gods  re- 
ceived the  name  by  which  the  peasantry  know  them 
to-day — Acs  Sidhe,  the  *'  People  of  the  Hills  ",  or, 
more  shortly,  the  Sidhe,  Every  god,  or  fairy,  is  a 
Fer-Sidhe^,  a  '*  Man  of  the  Hill";  and  every  goddess 
a  Bean-Sidhe,  a  ''Woman  of  the  Hill",  the  banshee 
of  popular  legend.^ 

The  most  famous  of  such  fairy  hills  are  about  five 
miles  from  Drogheda.^  They  are  still  connected 
with  the  names  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  though 
they  are  now  not  called  their  dwelling-places,  but 
their  tombs.  On  the  northern  bank  of  the  Boyne 
stand  seventeen  barrows,  three  of  which — Knowth, 
Dowth,  and  New  Grange — are  of  great  size.  The 
last  named,  largest,  and  best  preserved,  is  over 
300  feet  in  diameter,  and  70  feet  high,  while  its  top 
makes  a  platform  120  feet  across.  It  has  been  ex- 
plored, and  Roman  coins,  gold  torques,  copper  pins, 
and  iron  rings  and  knives  have  been  found  in  it; 
but  what  else  it  may  have  once  contained  will  never 
be  known,  for,  like  Knowth  and  Dowth,  it  was 
thoroughly  ransacked  by  Danish  spoilers  in  the 
ninth  century.  It  is  entered  by  a  square  doorway, 
the  rims  of  which  are  elaborately  ornamented  with 
a  kind  of  spiral  pattern.  This  entrance  leads  to  a 
stone  passage,  more  than  60  feet  long,  which  gradu- 
ally widens  and  rises,  until  it  opens  into  a  chamber 
with  a  conical  dome  20  feet  high.  On  each  side  of 
this  central  chamber  is  a  recess,  with  a  shallow  oval 


1  Pronounced  Far-shu. 

*  O'Curry :  Lectures  on  the  MS.  Materials  of  Ancient  Irish  History,  Appendix, 
p.  505.  3  See  Fergusson:  Rude  Stone  Monuments,  pp.  200-21.3. 


138         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

stone  basin  in  it.  The  huge  slabs  of  which  the 
whole  is  built  are  decorated  upon  both  the  outer 
and  the  inner  faces  with  the  same  spiral  pattern  as 
the  doorway. 

The  origin  of  these  astonishing  prehistoric  monu- 
ments is  unknown,  but  they  are  generally  attributed 
to  the  race  that  inhabited  Ireland  before  the  Celts. 
Gazing  at  marvellous  New  Grange,  one  might  very 
well  echo  the  words  of  the  old  Irish  poet  Mac  Nia, 
in  the  Book  of  Ballymote : 

"  Behold  the  Sidh  before  your  eyes. 
It  is  manifest  to  you  that  it  is  a  king's  mansion, 
Which  was  built  by  the  firm  Dagda, 
It  was  a  wonder,  a  court,  an  admirable  hill."^ 

It  is  not,  however,  with  New  Grange,  or  even 
with  Knowth  or  Dowth,  that  the  Dagda's  name  is 
now  associated.  It  is  a  smaller  barrow,  nearer  to 
the  Boyne,  which  is  known  as  the  **  Tomb  of  the 
Dagda".  It  has  never  been  opened,  and  Dr.  James 
Fergusson,  the  author  of  Rude  Stone  Monuments, 
who  holds  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  to  have  been  a 
real  people,  thinks  that  **  the  bones  and  armour  of 
the  great  Dagda  may  still  be  found  in  his  honoured 
grave  ".^  Other  Celtic  scholars  might  not  be  so 
sanguine,  though  verses  as  old  as  the  eleventh 
century  assert  that  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  used 
the  brughs  for  burial.  It  was  about  this  period  that 
the  mythology  of  Ireland  was  being  rewoven  into 
spurious  history.  The  poem,  which  is  called  the 
**  Chronicles  of  the  Tombs  ",  not  only  mentions  the 

1  O'Curry :  MS.  Materials,  p.  505. 

*  Fergusson :  Rude  Stone  Monuments,  p.  209. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  139 

''Monument  of  the  Dagda"  and  the  ''Monument 
of  the  Morrigu  ",  but  also  records  the  last  resting- 
places  of  Ogma,  Etain,  Cairpre,  Lugh,  Boann,  and 
Angus. 

We  have  for  the  present,  however,  to  consider 
Angus  in  a  far  less  sepulchral  light.  He  is,  indeed, 
very  much  alive  in  the  story  to  be  related.  The 
"  Son  of  the  Young  "  was  absent  when  the  distri- 
bution of  the  sidhe  was  made.  When  he  returned, 
he  came  to  his  father,  the  Dagda,  and  demanded 
one.  The  Dagda  pointed  out  to  him  that  they  had 
all  been  given  away.  Angus  protested,  but  what 
could  be  done?  By  fair  means,  evidently  nothing; 
but  by  craft,  a  great  deal.  The  wily  Angus  ap- 
peared to  reconcile  himself  to  fate,  and  only  begged 
his  father  to  allow  him  to  stay  at  the  sidh  of  Brugh- 
na-Boyne  (New  Grange)  for  a  day  and  a  night. 
The  Dagda  agreed  to  this,  no  doubt  congratulating 
himself  on  having  got  out  of  the  difficulty  so  easily. 
But  when  he  came  to  Angus  to  remind  him  that  the 
time  was  up,  Angus  refused  to  go.  He  had  been 
granted,  he  claimed,  day  and  night,  and  it  is  of  days 
and  nights  that  time  and  eternity  are  composed; 
therefore  there  was  no  limit  to  his  tenure  of  the 
sidh.  The  logic  does  not  seem  very  convincing  to 
our  modern  minds,  but  the  Dagda  is  said  to  have 
been  satisfied  with  it.  He  abandoned  the  best  of 
his  two  palaces  to  his  son,  who  took  peaceable  pos- 
session of  it.  Thus  it  got  a  second  name,  that  of 
the  Sidh  or  Brugh  of  the  "  Son  of  the  Young ''} 

The  Dagda  does  not,  after  this,  play  much  active 

1  This  story  is  contained  in  the  Book  of  Leinster. 


140         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

part  in  the  history  of  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu.  We  next  hear  of  a  council  of  gods  to  elect 
a  fresh  ruler.  There  were  five  candidates  for  the 
vacant  throne — Bodb  the  Red,  Mider,  Ilbhreach^ 
son  of  Mananndn,  Ler,  and  Angus  himself,  though 
the  last-named,  we  are  told,  had  little  real  desire  to 
rule,  as  he  preferred  a  life  of  freedom  to  the  dig- 
nities of  kingship.  The  Tuatha  De  Danann  went 
into  consultation,  and  the  result  of  their  deliberation 
was  that  their  choice  fell  upon  Bodb  the  Red,  for 
three  reasons — firstly,  for  his  own  sake;  secondly, 
for  his  father,  the  Dagda's  sake;  and  thirdly,  be- 
cause he  was  the  Dagda's  eldest  son.  The  other 
competitors  approved  this  choice,  except  two. 
Mider  refused  to  give  hostages,  as  was  the  custom, 
to  Bodb  Derg,  and  fled  with  his  followers  to  "a 
desert  country  round  Mount  Leinster ",  in  County 
Carlow,  while  L^r  retired  in  great  anger  to  Sidh 
Fionnachaidh,  declining  to  recognize  or  obey  the 
new  king. 

Why  Ler  and  Mider  should  have  so  taken  the 
matter  to  heart  is  difficult  to  understand,  unless  it 
was  because  they  were  both  among  the  oldest  of  the 
gods.  The  indifference  of  Angus  is  easier  to  explain. 
He  was  the  Gaelic  Eros,  and  was  busy  living  up 
to  his  character.  At  this  time,  the  object  of  his  love 
was  a  maiden  who  had  visited  him  one  night  in  a 
dream,  only  to  vanish  when  he  put  out  his  arms  to 
embrace  her.  All  the  next  day,  we  are  told,  Angus 
took  no  food.  Upon  the  following  night,  the  un- 
substantial   lady  again    appeared,   and   played   and 

*  Pronounced  llbrec. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  141 

sang  to  him.  That  following  day,  he  also  fasted. 
So  things  went  on  for  a  year,  while  Angus  pined 
and  wasted  for  love.  At  last  the  physicians  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  guessed  his  complaint,  and  told 
him  how  fatal  it  might  be  to  him.  Angus  asked 
that  his  mother  Boann  might  be  sent  for,  and,  when 
she  came,  he  told  her  his  trouble,  and  implored  her 
help.  She  went  to  the  Dagda  and  begged  him, 
if  he  did  not  wish  to  see  his  son  die  of  unrequited 
love,  a  disease  that  all  Diancecht's  medicine  and 
Goibniu's  magic  could  not  heal,  to  find  the  dream- 
maiden.  The  Dagda  could  do  nothing  himself,  but 
he  sent  to  Bodb  the  Red,  and  the  new  king  of  the 
gods  sent  in  turn  to  the  lesser  deities  of  Ireland, 
ordering  all  of  them  to  search  for  her.  For  a  year 
she  could  not  be  found,  but  at  last  the  disconsolate 
lover  received  a  message,  charging  him  to  come  and 
see  if  he  could  recognize  the  lady  of  his  dreams. 
Angus  came,  and  knew  her  at  once,  even  though 
she  was  surrounded  by  thrice  fifty  attendant  nymphs. 
Her  name  was  Caer,  and  she  was  the  daughter  of 
Etal  Ambuel,  who  had  a  sidh  at  Uaman,  in  Con- 
naught.  Bodb  the  Red  demanded  her  for  Angus 
in  marriage,  but  her  father  declared  that  he  had  no 
control  over  her.  She  was  a  swan-maiden,  he  said; 
and  every  year,  as  soon  as  summer  was  over,  she 
went  with  her  companions  to  a  lake  called  **  Dragon- 
Mouth  ",  and  there  all  of  them  became  swans.  But, 
refusing  to  be  thus  put  off,  Angus  waited  in  patience 
until  the  day  of  the  magical  change,  and  then  went 
down  to  the  shore  of  the  lake.  There,  surrounded 
by  thrice  fifty  swans,  he  saw  Caer,  herself  a  swan 


142         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

surpassing  all  the  rest  in  beauty  and  whiteness.  He 
called  to  her,  proclaiming  his  passion  and  his  name, 
and  she  promised  to  be  his  bride,  if  he  too  would 
become  a  swan.  He  agreed,  and  with  a  word  she 
changed  him  into  swan-shape,  and  thus  they  flew 
side  by  side  to  Angus's  sidh,  where  they  retook  the 
human  form,  and,  no  doubt,  lived  happily  as  long  as 
could  be  expected  of  such  changeable  immortals  as 
pagan  deities.^ 

Meanwhile,  the  people  of  the  goddess  Danu  were 
justly  incensed  against  both  L^r  and  Mider.  Bodb 
the  Red  made  a  yearly  war  upon  Mider  in  his  sidh, 
and  many  of  the  divine  race  were  killed  on  either 
side.  But  against  Ler,  the  new  king  of  the  gods 
refused  to  move,  for  there  had  been  a  great  affection 
between  them.  Many  times  Bodb  Derg  tried  to 
regain  L^r's  friendship  by  presents  and  compliments, 
but  for  a  long  time  without  success. 

At  last  Ler's  wife  died,  to  the  sea-god's  great 
sorrow.  When  Bodb  the  Red  heard  the  news,  he 
sent  a  messenger  to  Ler,  offering  him  one  of  his 
own  foster- daughters,  Aebh^  Aeife^  and  Ailbhe*, 
the  children  of  Ailioll  of  Arran.  Ler,  touched  by 
this,  came  to  visit  Bodb  the  Red  at  his  sidk,  and 
chose  Aebh  for  his  wife.  "  She  is  the  eldest,  so  she 
must  be  the  noblest  of  them,"  he  said.  They  were 
married,  and  a  great  feast  made,  and  L^r  took  her 
back  with  him  to  Sldh  Fionnachaidh. 

Aebh  bore  four  children  to  Ler.     The  eldest  was 

1  This  story,  called  the  Dream  of  Angus,  will  be  found  translated  into  English 
by  Dr.  Edward  Miiller  in  Vol.   III.  of  the  Revue  Celtique,  from  an  eighteenth- 
rentury  MS.  in  the  British  Museum. 
*  Pronounced  Aive.  ^  Pronounced  Aiva.  *  Ftonounced  Alva. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  143 

a  daughter  called  Finola,  the  second  was  a  son  called 
Aed;  the  two  others  were  twin  boys  called  Fiachra 
and  Conn,  but  in  giving  birth  to  those  Aebh  died. 

Bodb  the  Red  then  offered  Ler  another  of  his 
foster-children,  and  he  chose  the  second,  Aeife. 
Every  year  L^r  and  Aeife  and  the  four  children 
used  to  go  to  Mananndn  s  **  Feast  of  Age  ",  which 
was  held  at  each  of  the  sidhe  in  turn.  The  four 
children  grew  up  to  be  great  favourites  among  the 
people  of  the  goddess  Danu. 

But  Aeife  was  childless,  and  she  became  jealous 
of  Ler  s  children  ;  for  she  feared  that  he  would  love 
them  more  than  he  did  her.  She  brooded  over  this 
until  she  began,  first  to  hope  for,  and  then  to  plot 
their  deaths.  She  tried  to  persuade  her  servants  to 
murder  them,  but  they  would  not.  So  she  took  the 
four  children  to  Lake  Darvra  (now  called  Lough 
Derravargh  in  West  Meath),  and  sent  them  into  the 
water  to  bathe.  Then  she  made  an  incantation  over 
them,  and  touched  them,  each  in  turn,  with  a  druidical 
wand,  and  changed  them  into  swans. 

But,  though  she  had  magic  enough  to  alter  their 
shapes,  she  had  not  the  power  to  take  away  their 
human  speech  and  minds.  Finola  turned,  and 
threatened  her  with  the  anger  of  Ler  and  of  Bodb 
the  Red  when  they  came  to  hear  of  it.  She,  how- 
ever, hardened  her  heart,  and  refused  to  undo  what 
she  had  done.  The  children  of  Ler,  finding  their 
case  a  hopeless  one,  asked  her  how  long  she  in- 
tended to  keep  them  in  that  condition. 

**  You  would  be  easier  in  mind,"  she  said,  **if  you 
had  not  asked  the  question;    but   I   will  tell   you. 


144         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

You  shall  be  three  hundred  years  here,  on  Lake 
Darvra;  and  three  hundred  years  upon  the  Sea  of 
Moyle\  which  Is  between  Erin  and  Alba;  and 
three  hundred  years  more  at  Irros  Domnann^  and 
the  Isle  of  Glora  in  Erris^  Yet  you  shall  have  two 
consolations  in  your  troubles;  you  shall  keep  your 
human  minds,  and  yet  suffer  no  grief  at  knowing 
that  you  have  been  changed  into  swans,  and  you 
shall  be  able  to  sing  the  softest  and  sweetest  songs 
that  were  ever  heard  in  the  world." 

Then  Aeife  went  away  and  left  them.  She  re- 
turned to  Ler,  and  told  him  that  the  children  had 
fallen  by  accident  into  Lake  Darvra,  and  were 
drowned. 

But  Ler  was  not  satisfied  that  she  spoke  the  truth, 
and  went  in  haste  to  the  lake,  to  see  if  he  could  find 
traces  of  them.  He  saw  four  swans  close  to  the 
shore,  and  heard  them  talking  to  one  another  with 
human  voices.  As  he  approached,  they  came  out 
of  the  water  to  meet  him.  They  told  him  what 
Aeife  had  done,  and  begged  him  to  change  them 
back  into  their  own  shapes.  But  Ler's  magic  was 
not  so  powerful  as  his  wife's,  and  he  could  not. 

Nor  even  could  Bodb  the  Red — to  whom  Ler 
went  for  help, — for  all  that  he  was  king  of  the  gods. 
What  Aeife  had  done  could  not  be  undone.  But 
she  could  be  punished  for  it!  Bodb  ordered  his 
foster-daughter  to  appear  before  him,  and,  when  she 
came,  he  put  an  oath  on  her  to  tell  him  truly  "  what 
shape  of  all  others,  on  the  earth,  or  above  the  earth, 

»  Now  called  "  North  Channel".  '  The  Peninsula  of  Erris,  in  Mayo. 

3  A  small  island  off  Benmullet. 


:#'•* 


^^>, 


? 


"«lfc,     ^ 


LER   AND    THE   SWANS 
I'>oni  the  Drawing  by  J.  H.  Bacon,  A.  R.  A. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  145 

or  beneath  the  earth,  she  most  abhorred,  and  into 
which  she  most  dreaded  to  be  transformed".  Aeife 
was  obHged  to  answer  that  she  most  feared  to  be- 
come a  demon  of  the  air.  So  Bodb  the  Red  struck 
her  with  his  wand,  and  she  fled  from  them,  a  shriek- 
ing demon. 

All  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  went  to  Lake  Darvra 
to  visit  the  four  swans.  The  Milesians  heard  of  it, 
and  also  went;  for  it  was  not  till  long  after  this  that 
gods  and  mortals  ceased  to  associate.  The  visit 
became  a  yearly  feast.  But,  at  the  end  of  three 
hundred  years,  the  children  of  Ler  were  compelled 
to  leave  Lake  Darvra,  and  go  to  the  Sea  of  Moyle, 
to  fulfil  the  second  period  of  their  exile. 

They  bade  farewell  to  gods  and  men,  and  went. 
And,  for  fear  lest  they  might  be  hurt  by  anyone,  the 
Milesians  made  it  law  in  Ireland  that  no  man  should 
harm  a  swan,  from  that  time  forth  for  ever. 

The  children  of  Ler  suffered  much  from  tempest 
and  cold  on  the  stormy  Sea  of  Moyle,  and  they  were 
very  lonely.  Once  only  during  that  long  three 
hundred  years  did  they  see  any  of  their  friends. 
An  embassy  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  led  by  two 
sons  of  Bodb  the  Red,  came  to  look  for  them,  and 
told  them  all  that  had  happened  in  Erin  during  their 
exile. 

At  last  that  long  penance  came  to  an  end,  and 
they  went  to  Irros  Domnann  and  Innis  Glora  for 
their  third  stage.  And  while  it  was  wearily  drag- 
ging through,  Saint  Patrick  came  to  Ireland,  and 
put  an  end  to  the  power  of  the  gods  for  ever.  They 
had  been  banned  and  banished  when  the  children  of 

(8  319)  K 


146         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Ler  found  themselves  free  to  return  to  their  old 
home.  Sidh  Fionnechaidh  was  empty  and  deserted, 
for  Ler  had  been  killed  by  Caoilte,  the  cousin  of 
Finn  mac  Coul/ 

So,  after  long,  vain  searching  for  their  lost  relatives, 
they  gave  up  hope,  and  returned  to  the  Isle  of  Glora. 
They  had  a  friend  there,  the  Lonely  Crane  of  Innis- 
kea^,  which  has  lived  upon  that  island  ever  since  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  and  will  be  still  sitting  there 
on  the  day  of  judgment.  They  saw  no  one  else 
until,  one  day,  a  man  came  to  the  island.  He  told 
them  that  he  was  Saint  Caemhoc^  and  that  he  had 
heard  their  story.  He  brought  them  to  his  church, 
and  preached  the  new  faith  to  them,  and  they  believed 
on  Christ,  and  consented  to  be  baptised.  This  broke 
the  pagan  spell,  and,  as  soon  as  the  holy  water  was 
sprinkled  over  them,  they  returned  to  human  shape. 
But  they  were  very  old  and  bowed — three  aged  men 
and  an  ancient  woman.  They  did  not  live  long  after 
this,  and  Saint  Caemhoc,  who  had  baptised  them, 
buried  them  all  together  in  one  grave.* 

But,  in  telling  this  story,  we  have  leaped  nine 
hundred  years — a  great  space  in  the  history  even 
of  gods.  We  must  retrace  our  steps,  if  not  quite 
to  the  days  of  Eremon  and  Eber,  sons  of  Mil6,  and 
first  kings  of  Ireland,  at  any  rate  to  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  era. 


1  See  chap.  XIV — "  Finn  and  the  Fenians". 

2  An  island  off  the  coast  of  Mayo.  Its  lonely  crane  was  one  of  the  "  Wonders 
of  Ireland",  and  is  still  an  object  of  folk-belief.  ^  Pronounced  Kemoc. 

*  This  famous  story  of  the  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Ler  is  not  found  in  any  MS. 
earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  A  translation  of  it  has  been 
published  by  Eugene  O'Curry  in  Atlantis^  Vol.  IV,  from  which  the  present  abridg- 
ment is  made. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  147 

At  this  time  Eochaid  Airem  was  high  king  of 
Ireland,  and  reigned  at  Tara;  while,  under  him,  as 
vassal  monarchs,  Conchobar  mac  Nessa  ruled  over 
the  Red  Branch  Champions  of  Ulster;  Curoi  son  of 
Daire\  was  king  of  Munster;  Mesgegra  was  king 
of  Leinster;  and  Ailell,  with  his  famous  queen,  Medb, 
governed  Connaught. 

Shortly  before,  among  the  gods,  Angus  Son  of 
the  Young,  had  stolen  away  Etain,  the  wife  of  Mider. 
He  kept  her  imprisoned  in  a  bower  of  glass,  which 
he  carried  everywhere  with  him,  never  allowing  her 
to  leave  it,  for  fear  Mider  might  recapture  her.  The 
Gaelic  Pluto,  however,  found  out  where  she  was, 
and  was  laying  plans  to  rescue  her,  when  a  rival  of 
Etain  s  herself  decoyed  Angus  away  from  before  the 
pleasant  prison-house,  and  set  his  captive  free.  But, 
instead  of  returning  her  to  Mider,  she  changed  the 
luckless  goddess  into  a  fly,  and  threw  her  into  the 
air,  where  she  was  tossed  about  in  great  wretched- 
ness at  the  mercy  of  every  wind. 

At  the  end  of  seven  years,  a  gust  blew  her  on  to 
the  roof  of  the  house  of  Etair,  one  of  the  vassals  of 
Conchobar,  who  was  celebrating  a  feast.  The  un- 
happy fly,  who  was  Etain,  was  blown  down  the 
chimney  into  the  room  below,  and  fell,  exhausted, 
into  a  golden  cup  full  of  beer,  which  the  wife  of  the 
master  of  the  house  was  just  going  to  drink.  And 
the  woman  drank  Etain  with  the  beer. 

But,  of  course,  this  was  not  the  end  of  her — for 
the  gods  cannot  really  die, — but  only  the  beginning 
of  a  new  life,     Etain  was  reborn  as  the  daughter  of 

I  Pronounced  Dora, 


148         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Etair  s  wife,  no  one  knowing  that  she  was  not  of 
mortal  lineage.  She  grew  up  to  be  the  most  beauti- 
ful woman  in  Ireland. 

When  she  was  twenty  years  old,  her  fame  reached 
the  high  king,  who  sent  messengers  to  see  if  she 
was  as  fair  as  men  reported.  They  saw  her,  and 
returned  to  the  king  full  of  her  praises.  So  Eochaid 
himself  went  to  pay  her  a  visit.  He  chose  her  to  be 
his  queen,  and  gave  her  a  splendid  dowry. 

It  was  not  till  then  that  Mider  heard  of  her.  He 
came  to  her  in  the  shape  of  a  young  man,  beautifully 
dressed,  and  told  her  who  she  really  was,  and  how 
she  had  been  his  wife  among  the  people  of  the 
goddess  Danu.  He  begged  her  to  leave  the  king, 
and  come  with  him  to  his  sidh  at  Bri  Leith.  But 
Etain  refused  with  scorn. 

"  Do  you  think,"  she  said,  **  that  I  would  give  up 
the  high  king  of  Ireland  for  a  person  whose  name 
and  kindred  I  do  not  know,  except  from  his  own 
lips?" 

The  god  retired,  baffled  for  the  time.  But  one 
day,  as  King  Eochaid  sat  in  his  hall,  a  stranger 
entered.  He  was  dressed  in  a  purple  tunic,  his  hair 
was  like  gold,  and  his  eyes  shone  like  candles. 

The  king  welcomed  him. 

*' But  who  are  you?"  he  asked;  "for  I  do  not 
know  you." 

**  Yet  I  have  known  you  a  long  time,"  returned  the 
stranger. 

**  Then  what  is  your  name?" 

**  Not  a  very  famous  one.  I  am  Mider  of  Bri 
Leith." 


The  Gods  in  Exile  149 

"  Why  have  you  come  here?" 

**  To  challenge  you  to  a  game  of  chess." 

**  I  am  a  good  chess-player,"  replied  the  king,  who 
was  reputed  to  be  the  best  in  Ireland. 

*'  I  think  I  can  beat  you,"  answered  Mider. 

**  But  the  chess-board  is  in  the  queen  s  room,  and 
she  is  asleep,"  objected  Eochaid. 

**  It  does  not  matter,"  replied  Mider.  **  I  have 
brought  a  board  with  me  which  can  be  in  no  way 
worse  than  yours." 

He  showed  it  to  the  king,  who  admitted  that  the 
boast  was  true.  The  chess-board  was  made  of 
silver  set  in  precious  stones,  and  the  pieces  were 
of  gold. 

**  Play!"  said  Mider  to  the  king. 

"  I  never  play  without  a  wager,"  replied  Eochaid. 

*' What  shall  be  the  stake?"  asked  Mider. 

**  I  do  not  care,"  replied  Eochaid. 

"Good!"  returned  Mider.  "Let  it  be  that  the 
loser  pays  whatever  the  winner  demands." 

"  That  is  a  wager  fit  for  a  king,"  said  Eochaid. 

They  played,  and  Mider  lost.  The  stake  that 
Eochaid  claimed  from  him  was  that  Mider  and  his 
subjects  should  make  a  road  through  Ireland. 
Eochaid  watched  the  road  being  made,  and  noticed 
how  Mider  s  followers  yoked  their  oxen,  not  by  the 
horns,  as  the  Gaels  did,  but  at  the  shoulders,  which 
was  better.  He  adopted  the  practice,  and  thus  got 
his  nickname,  Airem,  that  is,  "The  Ploughman". 

After  a  year,  Mider  returned  and  challenged  the 
king  again,  the  terms  to  be  the  same  as  before. 
Eochaid  agreed  with  joy;    but,  this  time,  he  lost. 


150         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

**  I  could  have  beaten  you  before,  if  I  had  wished," 
said  Mider,  '*and  now  the  stake  I  demand  is  Etain,, 
your  queen." 

The  astonished  king,  who  could  not  for  shame 
go  back  upon  his  word,  asked  for  a  year's  delay. 
Mider  agreed  to  return  upon  that  day  year  to  claim 
Etain.  Eochaid  consulted  with  his  warriors,  and 
they  decided  to  keep  watch  through  the  whole  of 
the  day  fixed  by  Mider,  and  let  no  one  pass  in  or 
out  of  the  royal  palace  till  sunset.  For  Eochaid 
held  that  if  the  fairy  king  could  not  get  Etain  upon 
that  one  day,  his  promise  would  be  no  longer  bind- 
ing on  him. 

So,  when  the  day  came,  they  barred  the  door  and 
guarded  it,  but  suddenly  they  saw  Mider  among 
them  in  the  hall.  He  stood  beside  Etain,  and  sang 
this  song  to  her,  setting  out  the  pleasures  of  the 
homes  of  the  gods  under  the  enchanted  hills. 

"  O  fair  lady !  will  you  come  with  me 
To  a  wonderful  country  which  is  mine, 
Where  the  people's  hair  is  of  golden  hue. 
And  their  bodies  the  colour  of  virgin  snow? 

"  There  no  grief  or  care  is  known ; 
White  are  their  teeth,  black  their  eyelashes ; 
Delight  of  the  eye  is  the  rank  of  our  hosts. 
With  the  hue  of  the  fox-glove  on  every  cheek. 

"  Crimson  are  the  flowers  of  every  mead, 
Gracefully  speckled  as  the  blackbird's  egg; 
Though  beautiful  to  see  be  the  plains  of  Inisfail  ^ 
They  are  but  commons  compared  to  our  great  plains. 

^  A  poetical  name  for  Ireland. 


The  Gods  in  Exile  151 

"  Though  intoxicating  to  you  be  the  ale-drink  of  Inisfail, 
More  intoxicating  the  ales  of  the  great  country; 
The  only  land  to  praise  is  the  land  of  which  I  speak, 
Where  no  one  ever  dies  of  decrepit  age. 

"  Soft  sweet  streams  traverse  the  land ; 
The  choicest  of  mead  and  of  wine ; 
Beautiful  people  without  any  blemish; 
Love  without  sin,  without  wickedness. 

"  We  can  see  the  people  upon  all  sides, 
But  by  no  one  can  we  be  seen; 
The  cloud  of  Adam's  transgression  it  is 
That  prevents  them  from  seeing  us. 

"  O  lady,  should  you  come  to  my  brave  land. 
It  is  golden  hair  that  will  be  on  your  head ; 
Fresh  pork,  beer,  new  milk,  and  ale, 
You  there  with  me  shall  have,  O  fair  lady!"* 

Then  Mider  greeted  Eochaid,  and  told  him  that 
he  had  come  to  take  away  Etain,  according  to  the 
king  s  w^ager.  And,  while  the  king  and  his  warriors 
looked  on  helplessly,  he  placed  one  arm  round  the 
now  willing  woman,  and  they  both  vanished.  This 
broke  the  spell  that  hung  over  everyone  in  the  hall; 
they  rushed  to  the  door,  but  all  they  could  see  were 
two  swans  flying  away. 

The  king  would  not,  however,  yield  to  the  god. 
He  sent  to  every  part  of  Ireland  for  news  of  Etain, 
but  his  messengers  all  came  back  without  having 
been  able  to  find  her.  At  last,  a  druid  named 
Dalin  learned,  by  means  of  ogams  carved  upon 
wands  of  yew,  that  she  was  hidden  under  Mider's 

^  Translated  by  O'Curry,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  Lecture 
IX,  p.  192,  193. 


152         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

sidh  of  Bri  Leith.  So  Eochaid  marched  there  with 
an  army,  and  began  to  dig  deep  into  the  abode  of 
the  gods  of  which  the  **  fairy  hill "  was  the  portal. 
Mider,  as  terrified  as  was  the  Greek  god  Hades 
when  it  seemed  likely  that  the  earth  would  be  rent 
open,^  and  his  domains  laid  bare  to  the  sight,  sent 
out  fifty  fairy  maidens  to  Eochaid,  every  one  of 
them  having  the  appearance  of  Etain.  But  the 
king  would  only  be  content  with  the  real  Etain,  so 
that  Mider,  to  save  his  sidh,  was  at  last  obliged  to 
give  her  up.  And  she  lived  with  the  King  of  Ire- 
land after  that  until  the  death  of  both  of  them. 

But  Mider  never  forgave  the  insult.  He  bided 
his  time  for  three  generations,  until  Eochaid  and 
Etain  had  a  male  descendant.  For  they  had  no 
son,  but  only  a  daughter  called  Etain,  like  her 
mother,  and  this  second  Etain  had  a  daughter  called 
Messbuachallo,  who  had  a  son  called  Conair6,  sur- 
named  **the  Great".  Mider  and  the  gods  wove 
the  web  of  fate  round  Conaire,  so  that  he  and  all  his 
men  died  violent  deaths.^ 

1  Iliad,  Book  XX. 

'The  story  of  Mider's  revenge  and  Conair^'s  death  is  told  in  the  romance 
Bruidhen  Dd  Derga,  "The  Destruction  of  Da  Derga's  Fort",  translated  by  Dr. 
Whitley  Stokes,  Eugene  O' Curry   and  Professor  Zimmer  from  the  original  text. 


CHAPTER    XII 


THE    IRISH    ILIAD 


With  Eber  and  Eremon,  sons  of  Mil6,  and 
conquerors  of  the  gods,  begins  a  fresh  series  of 
characters  in  Gaelic  tradition — the  early  **  Milesian  " 
kings  of  Ireland.  Though  monkish  chroniclers 
have  striven  to  find  history  in  the  legends  handed 
down  concerning  them,  they  are  none  the  less 
almost  as  mythical  as  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann.  The 
first  of  them  who  has  the  least  appearance  of  reality 
is  Tigernmas,  who  is  recorded  to  have  reigned  a 
hundred  years  after  the  coming  of  the  Milesians. 
He  seems  to  have  been  what  is  sometimes  called 
a  ** Culture-king",  bearing  much  the  same  kind  of 
relation  to  Ireland  as  Theseus  bore  to  Athens  or 
Minos  to  Crete.  During  his  reign,  nine  new  lakes 
and  three  new  rivers  broke  forth  from  beneath  the 
earth  to  give  their  waters  to  Erin.  Under  his 
auspices,  gold  was  first  smelted,  ornaments  of  gold 
and  silver  were  first  made,  and  clothes  first  dyed. 
He   is   said    to   have   perished    mysteriously^  with 

*  ' '  There  came 

Tigernmas,  the  prince  of  Tara  yonder, 

On  Hallowe'en  with  many  hosts, 

A  cause  of  grief  to  them  was  the  deed. 

"  Dead  were  the  men 
Of  Banba's  host,  without  happy  strength, 

153 


154         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

three-fourths  of  the  men  of  Erin  while  worshipping 
Cromm  Cruaich  on  the  field  of  Mag  Slecht.  In  him 
Mr.  Nutt  sees,  no  doubt  rightly,  the  great  mythical 
king  who,  in  almost  all  national  histories,  closes 
the  strictly  mythological  age,  and  inaugurates  a  new 
era  of  less  obviously  divine,  if  hardly  less  apocryphal 
characters.^ 

In  spite,  however,  of  the  worship  of  the  Tuatha 
D6  Danann  instituted  by  Eremon,  we  find  the  early 
kings  and  heroes  of  Ireland  walking  very  familiarly 
with  their  gods.  Eochaid  Airem,  high  king  of 
Ireland,  was  apparently  reckoned  a  perfectly  fit 
suitor  for  the  goddess  Etain,  and  proved  a  far  from 
unsuccessful  rival  of  Mider,  the  Gaelic  Pluto. ^  And 
adventures  of  love  or  war  were  carried  quite  as 
cheerfully  among  the  sidh  dwellers  by  Eochaids 
contemporaries  —  Conchobar  son  of  Nessa,  King 
of  Ulster,  Curoi  son  of  Daire,  King  of  Munster, 
Mesgegra,  King  of  Leinster,  and  Ailell  and  Medb*, 
King  and  Queen  of  Connaught. 

All  these  figures  of  the  second  Gaelic  cycle  (that 
of  the  heroes  of  Ulster,  and  especially  of  their 
great  champion,  Cuchulainn)  lived,  according  to 
Irish    tradition,    at    about    the    beginning    of    the 

Around  Tigernmas,  the  destructive  man  in  the  North, 

From  the  worship  of  Cromm  Cruaich — 't  was  no  luck  for  them. 

"  For  I  have  learnt, 
Except  one-fourth  of  the  keen  Gaels 
Not  a  man  alive — lasting  the  snare ! 
Escaped  without  death  in  his  mouth." 
— Dr.  Kuno  Meyer's  translation  of  the  Dinnsenchus  of  Mag  Slecht. 

^Nutt:    Voyage  of  Bran,  p.  164. 

2 See  chap,  xi— "The  Gods  in  Exile". 

*  Pronounced  Maive. 


The  Irish  Iliad  ^  155 

Christian  era.  Conchobar,  indeed,  is  said  to  nave 
expired  in  a  fit  of  rage  on  hearing  of  the  death 
of  Christ.^ 

But  this  is  a  very  transparent  monkish  interpola- 
tion into  the  original  story.  A  quite  different  view 
is  taken  by  most  modern  scholars,  who  would  see 
gods  and  not  men  in  all  the  legendary  characters 
of  the  Celtic  heroic  cycles.  Upon  such  a  subject, 
however,  one  may  legitimately  take  sides.  Were 
King  Conchobar  and  his  Ultonian  champions,  Finn 
and  his  Fenians,  Arthur  and  his  Knights  once  living 
men  round  whom  the  attributes  of  gods  have 
gathered,  or  were  they  ancient  deities  renamed  and 
stripped  of  some  of  their  divinity  to  make  them 
more  akin  to  their  human  worshippers."*  History 
or  mythology?  A  mingling,  perhaps,  of  both. 
Cuchulainn^  may  have  been  the  name  of  a  real 
Gaelic  warrior,  however  suspiciously  he  may  now 
resemble  the  sun-god,  who  is  said  to  have  been  his 
father.  King  Conchobar  may  have  been  the  real 
chief  of  a  tribe  of  Irish  Celts  before  he  became  an 
adumbration  of  the  Gaelic  sky-god.  It  is  the  same 
problem  that  confronts  us  in  dealing  with  the  heroic 
legends  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Were  Achilles, 
Agamemnon,  Odysseus,  Paris,  ^neas  gods,  demi- 
gods, or  men?  Let  us  call  them  all  alike — whether 
they  be  Greek  or  Trojan  heroes.  Red  Branch 
Champions,  or  followers  of  the  Gaelic  Finn  or  the 
British  Arthur — demi-gods.      Even  so,   they  stand 

^The  story  of  the  Tragical  Death  of  King  Conchobar ^  translated  by  Eugene 
O' Curry  from  the  Book  of  Leinster,  will  be  found  in  the  appendix  to  his  MS. 
Materials  of  Irish  History,  and  (more  accessible)  in  Miss  Hull's  Cuchullin  Saga. 

'  The  name  is  best  pronounced  Ciihoolin  or  Cuchullin  {ch  as  in  German). 


156         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

definitely  apart  from  the  older  gods  who  were 
greater  than  they  were. 

We  are  stretching  no  point  in  calling  them  demi- 
gods, for  they  were  god-descended.^  Cuchulainn, 
the  greatest  hero  of  the  Ulster  cycle,  was  doubly 
so;  for  on  his  mothers  side  he  was  the  grandson 
of  the  Dagda,  while  Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand  is 
said  to  have  been  his  father.  His  mother,  Dechtir^, 
daughter  of  Maga,  the  daughter  of  Angus  "  Son  of 
the  Young ",  was  half-sister  to  King  Conchobar, 
and  all  the  other  principal  heroes  were  of  hardly 
less  lofty  descent.  It  is  small  wonder  that  they  are 
described  in  ancient  manuscripts  ^  as  terrestrial  gods 
and  goddesses. 

"  Terrestrial "  they  may  have  been  in  form,  but 
their  acts  were  superhuman.  Indeed,  compared 
with  the  more  modest  exploits  of  the  heroes  of  the 
**  Iliad  ",  they  were  those  of  giants.  Where  Greek 
warriors  slew  their  tens,  these  Ultonians  despatched 
their  hundreds.  They  came  home  after  such  ex- 
ploits so  heated  that  their  cold  baths  boiled  over. 
When  they  sat  down  to  meat,  they  devoured  whole 
oxen,  and  drank  their  mead  from  vats.  With  one 
stroke  of  their  favourite  swords  they  beheaded  hills 
for  sport.  The  gods  themselves  hardly  did  more, 
and  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  in  those  old  days 
not  only  might  the  sons  of  gods  look  upon  the 
daughters  of  men  and  find  them  fair,  but  immortal 


*  The  descent  of  the  principal  Red  Branch  Heroes  from  the  Tuatha  De  Danann 
is  given  in  a  table  in  Miss  Hull's  Introduction  to  her  Cuchullin  Saga. 

2  Conchobar  is  called  a  terrestrial  god  of  the  Ultonians  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun 
Cow,  and  Dechtir6  is  termed  a  goddess  in  the  Book  of  Leinster. 


The  Irish  Iliad  157 

women  also  need  not  be  too  proud  to  form  passing 
alliances  with  mortal  men. 

Some  of  the  older  deities  seem  to  have  already- 
passed  out  of  memory  at  the  time  of  the  compilation 
of  the  Ulster  cycle.  At  any  rate,  they  make  no 
appearance  in  it.  Dead  Nuada  rests  in  the  grianan 
of  Aileach ;  Ogma  lies  low  in  sidh  Airceltrai ;  while 
the  Dagda,  thrust  into  the  background  by  his  son 
Angus,  mixes  himself  very  little  in  the  affairs  of 
Erin.^  But  the  Morrfgii  is  no  less  eager  in  en- 
couraging human  or  semi-divine  heroes  to  war  than 
she  was  when  she  revived  the  fainting  spirits  of  the 
folk  of  the  goddess  Danu  at  the  Battle  of  Moytura. 
The  gods  who  appear  most  often  in  the  cycle  of 
the  Red  Branch  of  Ulster  are  the  same  that  have 
lived  on  throughout  with  the  most  persistent  vitality. 
Lugh  the  Long-handed,  Angus  of  the  Brugh,  Mider, 
Bodb  the  Red,  and  Mananndn  son  of  Ler,  are  the 
principal  deities  that  move  in  the  background  of  the 
stage  where  the  chief  parts  are  now  played  by 
mortals.  But,  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  some  of 
the  greater  divine  figures,  the  ranks  of  the  gods  are 
being  recruited  from  below.  All  manner  of  inferior 
divinities  claim  to  be  members  of  the  tribe  of  the 
goddess  Danu.  The  goblins  and  sprites  and  demons 
of  the  air  who  shrieked  around  battles  are  described 
collectively  as  Tuatha  D6  Danann.^ 

As  for  the  Fomors,  they  have  lost  their  distinc- 
tive names,  though  they  are  still  recognized  as 
dwellers  beneath  the  deep,  who  at  times  raid  upon 

1  He  js  last  heard  of  as  chief  cook  to  Conair^  the  Great,  a  mythical  king  of 
Ireland.  a  j^  the  Book  of  Leinster. 


158         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  coast,  and  do  battle  with  the  heroes  over  whom 
Conchobar  ruled  at  Emain   Macha. 

This  seat  of  his  government,  the  traditionary  site 
of  which  is  still  marked  by  an  extensive  prehistoric 
entrenchment  called  Navan  Fort\  near  Armagh, 
was  the  centre  of  an  Ulster  that  stretched  south- 
wards as  far  as  the  Boyne,  and  round  its  ruler 
gathered  such  a  galaxy  of  warriors  as  Ireland  had 
never  seen  before,  or  will  again.  They  called  them- 
selves the  '*  Champions  of  the  Red  Branch";  there 
was  not  one  of  them  who  was  not  a  hero;  but  they 
are  all  dwarfed  by  one  splendid  figure — Cuchulainn, 
whose  name  means  *'  Culann's  Hound ".  Mr. 
Alfred  Nutt  calls  him  ''the  Irish  Achilles  "2,  while 
Professor  Rhys  would  rather  see  in  him  a  Heracles 
of  the  Gaels.^  Like  Achilles,  he  was  the  chosen 
hero  of  his  people,  invincible  in  battle,  and  yet 
'*at  once  to  early  death  and  sorrows  doomed  be- 
yond the  lot  of  man  ",  while,  like  Heracles,  his  life 
was  a  series  of  wonderful  exploits  and  labours.  It 
matters  little  enough;  for  the  lives  of  all  such 
mythical  heroes  must  be  of  necessity  somewhat 
alike. 

If  Achilles  and  Heracles  were,  as  some  think, 
personifications  of  the  sun,  Cuchulainn  is  not  less 
so.  Most  of  his  attributes,  as  the  old  stories  record 
them,  are  obviously  solar  symbols.  He  seemed 
generally  small  and  insignificant,  yet,  when  he  was 

1  For  a  description  of  Navan  Fort  see  a  paper  by  M.  de  Jubainville  in  the  Revue 
Celtique,  Vol.  XVI. 

2  Cuchulainn,  the  Irish  Achilles.     By  Alfred  Nutt.     Popular  Studies  in  Myth- 
ology, Romance,  and  Folklore,  No.  8. 

8  See  a  series  of  interesting  parallels  between  Cuchulainn  and  Heracles  in  Studies 
in  the  Arthurian  Legend,  chap.  IX  and  x. 


The  Irish  Iliad  159 

at  his  full  strength,  no  one  could  look  him  in  the 
face  without  blinking,  while  the  heat  of  his  con- 
stitution melted  snow  for  thirty  feet  all  round  him. 
He  turned  red  and  hissed  as  he  dipped  his  body 
into  its  bath — the  sea.  Terrible  was  his  trans- 
formation when  sorely  oppressed  by  his  enemies, 
as  the  sun  is  by  mist,  storm,  or  eclipse.  At  such 
times  "among  the  aerial  clouds  over  his  head  were 
visible  the  virulent  pouring  showers  and  sparks  of 
ruddy  fire  which  the  seething  of  his  savage  wrath 
caused  to  mount  up  above  him.  His  hair  became 
tangled  about  his  head,  as  it  had  been  branches  of 
a  red  thorn-bush  stuffed  into  a  strongly-fenced  gap. 
.  .  .  Taller,  thicker,  more  rigid,  longer  than  mast 
of  a  great  ship  was  the  perpendicular  jet  of  dusky 
blood  which  out  of  his  scalp  s  very  central  point 
shot  upwards  and  then  was  scattered  to  the  four 
cardinal  points;  whereby  was  formed  a  magic  mist 
of  gloom  resembling  the  smoky  pall  that  drapes 
a  regal  dwelling,  what  time  a  king  at  nightfall  of  a 
winters  day  draws  near  to  it."^ 

So  marvellous  a  being^  was,  of  course,  of  mar- 
vellous birth.  His  mother,  Dechtir^,  was  on  the 
point  of  being  married  to  an  Ulster  chieftain  called 
Sualtam,  and  was  sitting  at  the  wedding- feast,  when 
a  may-fly  flew  into  her  cup  of  wine  and  was  un- 
wittingly swallowed  by  her.     That  same  afternoon 

1  The  Tdin  B6  Chuailgni.    Translated  by  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady. 

'  The  Irish  romances  relating  to  Cuchulainn  and  his  cycle,  nearly  a  hundred  in 
number,  need  hardly  be  referred  to  severally  in  this  chapter.  Of  many  of  the 
tales,  too,  there  exist  several  slightly-varying  versions.  Many  of  them  have  been 
translated  by  different  scholars.  The  reader  desiring  a  more  complete  survey  of 
the  Cuchulainn  legend  is  referred  to  Miss  Hull's  Cuchullin  Saga  or  to  Ladv 
Gregory's  Cuchulain  of  Mvirthemne. 


i6o         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

she  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  and  in  her  dream  the 
sun-god  Lugh  appeared  to  her,  and  told  her  that 
it  was  he  whom  she  had  swallowed,  and  bore  within 
her.  He  ordered  her  and  her  fifty  attendant  maidens 
to  come  with  him  at  once,  and  he  put  upon  them 
the  shapes  of  birds,  so  that  they  were  not  seen  to 
go.  Nothing  was  heard  of  them  again.  But  one 
day,  months  later,  a  flock  of  beautiful  birds  appeared 
before  Emain  Macha,  and  drew  out  its  warriors  in 
their  chariots  to  hunt  them. 

They  followed  the  birds  till  nightfall,  when  they 
found  themselves  at  the  Brugh  on  the  Boyne,  where 
the  great  gods  had  their  homes.  As  they  looked 
everywhere  for  shelter,  they  suddenly  saw  a  splen- 
did palace.  A  tall  and  handsome  man,  richly 
dressed,  came  out  and  welcomed  them  and  led 
them  in.  Within  the  hall  were  a  beautiful  and 
noble-faced  woman  and  fifty  maidens,  and  on  the 
tables  were  the  richest  meats  and  wines,  and  every- 
thing fit  for  the  needs  of  warriors.  So  they  rested 
there  the  night,  and,  during  the  night,  they  heard 
the  cry  of  a  new-born  child.  The  next  morning, 
the  man  told  them  who  he  was,  and  that  the  woman 
was  Conchobar's  half-sister  Dechtir6,  and  he  ordered 
them  to  take  the  child,  and  bring  it  up  among  the 
warriors  of  Ulster.  So  they  brought  him  back, 
together  with  his  mother  and  the  maidens,  and 
Dechtir6  married  Sualtam,  and  all  the  chiefs,  cham- 
pions, druids,  poets,  and  lawgivers  of  Ulster  vied 
with  one  another  in  bringing  up  the  mysterious  infant. 

At  first  they  called  him  Setanta;  and  this  is  how 
he  came  to  change  his  name.     While  still  a  child. 


The  Irish  Iliad  i6i 

he  was  the  strongest  of  the  boys  of  Emain  Macha, 
and  the  champion  in  their  sports.  One  day  he  was 
playing  hurley  single-handed  against  all  the  others, 
and  beating  them,  when  Conchobar  the  King  rode 
by  with  his  nobles  on  the  way  to  a  banquet  given 
by  Culann,  the  chief  smith  of  the  Ultonians.  Con- 
chobar called  to  the  boy,  inviting  him  to  go  with 
them,  and  he  replied  that,  when  the  game  was 
finished,  he  would  follow.  As  soon  as  the  Ulster 
champions  were  in  Culann  s  hall,  the  smith  asked 
the  king's  leave  to  unloose  his  terrible  watch-dog, 
which  was  as  strong  and  fierce  as  a  hundred  hounds; 
and  Conchobar,  forgetting  that  the  boy  was  to 
follow  them,  gave  his  permission.  Immediately 
the  hound  saw  Setanta  coming,  it  rushed  at  him, 
open-mouthed.  But  the  boy  flung  his  playing-ball 
into  its  mouth,  and  then,  seizing  it  by  the  hind-legs, 
dashed  it  against  a  rock  till  he  had  killed  it. 

The  smith  Culann  was  very  angry  at  the  death 
of  his  dog;  for  there  was  no  other  hound  in  the 
world  like  him  for  guarding  a  house  and  flocks. 
So  Setanta  promised  to  find  and  train  up  another 
one,  not  less  good,  for  Culann,  and,  until  it  was 
trained,  to  guard  the  smith's  house  as  though  he 
were  a  dog  himself.  This  is  why  he  was  called 
Cuchulainn,  that  is,  **  Culann's  Hound";  and  Cath- 
bad  the  Druid  prophesied  that  the  time  would 
come  when  the  name  would  be  in  every  man's 
mouth. 

Not  long  after  this,  Cuchulainn  overheard  Cath- 
bad  giving  druidical  instruction,  and  one  of  his 
pupils  asking   him   what    that  day  would   be   pro- 

(B219)  L 


1 62         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

pitious  for.  Cathbad  replied  that,  if  any  young 
man  first  took  arms  on  that  day,  his  name  would 
be  greater  than  that  of  any  other  hero's,  but  his 
life  would  be  short.  At  once,  the  boy  went  to  King 
Conchobar,  and  demanded  arms  and  a  chariot.  Con- 
chobar  asked  him  who  had  put  such  a  thought  into 
his  head;  and  he  answered  that  it  was  Cathbad  the 
Druid.  So  Conchobar  gave  him  arms  and  armour, 
and  sent  him  out  with  a  charioteer.  That  evening, 
Cuchulainn  brought  back  the  heads  of  three  cham- 
pions who  had  killed  many  of  the  warriors  of  Ulster. 
He  was  then  only  seven  years  old. 

The  women  of  Ulster  so  loved  Cuchulainn  after 
this  that  the  warriors  grew  jealous,  and  insisted  that 
a  wife  should  be  found  for  him.  But  Cuchulainn 
was  very  hard  to  please.  He  would  have  only  one, 
Emer\  the  daughter  of  Forgall  the  Wily,  the  best 
maiden  in  Ireland  for  the  six  gifts — the  gift  of 
beauty,  the  gift  of  voice,  the  gift  of  sweet  speech, 
the  gift  of  needlework,  the  gift  of  wisdom,  and  the 
gift  of  chastity.  So  he  went  to  woo  her,  but  she 
laughed  at  him  for  a  boy.  Then  Cuchulainn  swore 
by  the  gods  of  his  people  that  he  would  make  his 
name  known  wherever  the  deeds  of  heroes  were 
spoken  of,  and  Emer  promised  to  marry  him  if  he 
could  take  her  from  her  warlike  kindred. 

When  Forgall,  her  father,  came  to  know  of  this 
betrothal,  he  devised  a  plan  to  put  an  end  to  it. 
He  went  to  visit  King  Conchobar  at  Emain  Macha, 
There  he  pretended  to  have  heard  of  Cuchulainn 
for  the  first  time,  and  he  saw  him  do  all  his  feats. 

1  Pronounced  Avair, 


The  Irish  Iliad  163 

He  said,  loud  enough  to  be  overheard  by  all,  that  if 
so  promising  a  youth  dared  to  go  to  the  Island  of 
Scathach  the  Amazon,  in  the  east  of  Alba,^  and 
learn  all  her  warrior- craft,  no  living  man  would  be 
able  to  stand  before  him.  It  was  hard  to  reach 
Scathachs  Isle,  and  still  harder  to  return  from  it, 
and  Forgall  felt  certain  that,  if  Cuchulainn  went, 
he  would  get  his  death  there. 

Of  course,  nothing  would  now  satisfy  Cuchulainn  but 
going.  His  two  friends,  Laegaire  the  Battle- winner 
and  Conall  the  Victorious,  said  that  they  would  go 
with  him.  But,  before  they  had  gone  far,  they  lost 
heart  and  turned  back.  Cuchulainn  went  on  alone, 
crossing  the  Plain  of  1 11- Luck,  where  men's  feet 
stuck  fast,  while  sharp  grasses  sprang  up  and  cut 
them,  and  through  the  Perilous  Glens,  full  of  devour- 
ing wild  beasts,  until  he  came  to  the  Bridge  of  the 
Cliff,  which  rose  on  end,  till  it  stood  straight  up  like 
a  ship's  mast,  as  soon  as  anyone  put  foot  on  it. 
Three  times  Cuchulainn  tried  to  cross  it,  and  thrice 
he  failed.  Then  anger  came  into  his  heart,  and  a 
magic  halo  shone  round  his  head,  and  he  did  his 
famous  feat  of  the  "hero's  salmon  leap",  and  landed, 
in  one  jump,  on  the  middle  of  the  bridge,  and  then 
slid  down  it  as  it  rose  up  on  end. 

Scathach  was  in  the  dun,  with  her  two  sons. 
Cuchulainn  went  to  her,  and  put  his  sword  to  her 
breast,  and  threatened  to  kill  her  if  she  would  not 
teach  him  all  her  own  skill  in  arms.  So  he  became 
her  pupil,  and  she  taught  him  all  her  war-craft.  In 
return,  Cuchulainn  helped  her  against  a  rival  queen 

1  Usually  identified,  however,  with  the  Isle  of  Skye. 


164         Mythology  of  the  Bi^itish  Islands 

of  the  Amazons,  called  Aoife\  He  conquered  Aoife, 
and  compelled  her  to  make  peace  with  Scathach. 

Then  he  returned  to  Ireland,  and  went  in  a 
scythed  chariot  to  Forgall's  palace.  He  leaped 
over  its  triple  walls,  and  slew  everyone  who  came 
near  him.  Forgall  met  his  death  in  trying  to 
escape  Cuchulainn's  rage.  He  found  Emer,  and 
placed  her  in  his  chariot,  and  drove  away;  and, 
every  time  that  Forgalls  warriors  came  up  to  them, 
he  turned,  and  slew  a  hundred,  and  put  the  rest 
to  flight.  He  reached  Emain  Macha  in  safety,  and 
he  and  Emer  were  married  there. 

And  so  great,  after  this,  were  the  fame  of  Cu- 
chulainn's prowess  and  Emer  s  beauty  that  the  men 
and  women  of  Ulster  yielded  them  precedence — 
him  among  the  warriors  and  her  among  the  women 
— in  evexy  feast  and  banquet  at  Emain  Macha. 

But  all  that  Cuchulainn  had  done  up  to  this  time 
was  as  nothing  to  the  deeds  he  did  in  the  great  war 
which  all  the  rest  of  Ireland,  headed  by  Ailill  and 
Medb,  King  and  Queen  of  Connaught,  made  upon 
Ulster,  to  get  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cualgne.^  This 
Bull  was  one  of  two,  of  fairy  descent.  They  had 
originally  been  the  swineherds  of  two  of  the  gods, 
Bodb,  King  of  the  Sidhe  of  Munster,  and  Ochall 
Ochne,  King  of  the  Sfdhe  of  Connaught.  As 
swineherds  they  were  in  perpetual  rivalry;  then, 
the  better  to  carry  on  their  quarrel,  they  changed 
themselves  into  two  ravens,  and  foug^ht  for  a  year; 

1  Pronounced  Eefa. 

2  A  literal  translation  by  Miss  Winifred  Faraday  of  the  Tdin  Bo  Chuailgni  from 
the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  and  the  Yellow  Book  of  Lecan  has  been  published  by 
Mr.  Nutt — Grimm  Library,  No.  16. 


The  Irish  Iliad  165 

next  they  turned  into  water  -  monsters,  which  tore 
one  another  for  a  year  in  the  Suir  and  a  year  in 
the  Shannon;  then  they  became  human  again  and 
fought  as  champions;  and  ended  by  changing  into 
eels.  One  of  these  eels  went  into  the  River  Cruind, 
in  Cualgne\  in  Ulster,  where  it  was  swallowed  by 
a  cow  belonging  to  Daire  of  Cualgne,  and  the  other 
into  the  spring  of  Uaran  Garad,  in  Connaught, 
where  it  passed  into  the  belly  of  a  cow  of  Queen 
Medb's.  Thus  were  born  those  two  famous  beasts, 
the  Brown  Bull  of  Ulster  and  the  White-horned 
Bull  of  Connaught. 

Now  the  White-horned  was  of*  such  proud  mind 
that  he  scorned  to  belong  to  a  woman,  and  he  went 
out  of  Medb's  herds  into  those  of  her  husband 
Ailill.  So  that  when  Ailill  and  Medb  one  day,  in 
their  idleness,  counted  up  their  possessions,  to  set 
them  off  one  against  the  other,  although  they  were 
equal  in  every  other  thing,  in  jewels  and  clothes 
and  household  vessels,  in  sheep  and  horses  and 
swine  and  cattle,  Medb  had  no  one  bull  that  was 
worthy  to  be  set  beside  Ailills  White-horned.  Re- 
fusing to  be  less  in  anything  than  her  husband, 
the  proud  queen  sent  heralds,  with  gifts  and  compli- 
ments, to  Daire,  asking  him  to  lend  her  the  Brown 
Bull  for  a  year.  Daire  would  have  done  so  gladly 
had  not  one  of  Medb's  messengers  been  heard  boast- 
ing in  his  cups  that,  if  Daire  had  not  lent  the  Brown 
Bull  of  his  own  free-will,  Medb  would  have  taken 
it.  This  was  reported  to  Daire,  who  at  once  swore 
that  she  should  never  have  it.      Medb's  messenger 

1  Pronounced  Cooley. 


1 66         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

returned;   and  the  Queen  of  Connaught,  furious  at 
his  refusal,  vowed  that  she  would  take  it  by  force. 

She  assembled  the  armies  of  all  the  rest  of  Ireland 
to  go  against  Ulster,  and  made  Fergus  son  of  Roy, 
an  Ulster  champion  who  had  quarrelled  with  King 
Conchobar,  its  leader.  They  expected  to  have  an 
easy  victory,  for  the  warriors  of  Ulster  were  at  that 
time  lying  under  a  magic  weakness  which  fell  upon 
them  for  many  days  in  each  year,  as  the  result  of  a 
curse  laid  upon  them,  long  before,  by  a  goddess  who 
had  been  insulted  by  one  of  Conchobar's  ancestors. 
Medb  called  up  a  prophetess  of  her  people  to  fore- 
tell victory.  **  How  do  you  see  our  hosts?"  asked 
the  queen  of  the  seeress.  **  I  see  crimson  on  them; 
I  see  red,"  she  replied.  *'  But  the  warriors  of  Ulster 
are  lying  in  their  sickness.  Nay,  how  do  you  see 
our  men?"  **  I  see  them  all  crimson;  I  see  them 
all  red,"  she  repeated.  And  then  she  added  to  the 
astonished  queen,  who  had  expected  a  quite  different 
foretelling:  ''  For  I  see  a  small  man  doing  deeds  of 
arms,  though  there  are  many  wounds  on  his  smooth 
skin ;  the  hero-light  shines  round  his  head,  and  there 
is  victory  on  his  forehead;  he  is  richly  clothed,  and 
young  and  beautiful  and  modest,  but  he  is  a  dragon 
in  battle.  His  appearance  and  his  valour  are  those 
of  Cuchulainn  of  Muirthemne;  who  that  '  Culann's 
hound '  from  Muirthemne  may  be,  I  do  not  know ; 
but  I  know  this,  that  all  our  army  will  be  reddened 
by  him.  He  is  setting  out  for  battle;  he  will  hew 
down  your  hosts;  the  slaughter  he  shall  make  will 
be  long  remembered;  there  will  be  many  women 
crying  over  the  bodies  mangled  by  the  Hound  of 


The  Irish  Iliad  167 

the  Forge  whom  I  see  before  me  now."^  For  Cu- 
chulainn  was,  for  some  reason  unknown  to  us,  the 
only  man  in  Ulster  who  was  not  subject  to  the 
magic  weakness,  and  therefore  it  fell  upon  him  to 
defend  Ulster  single-handed  against  the  whole  of 
Medb's  army. 

In  spite  of  the  injury  done  him  by  King  Concho- 
bar,  Fergus  still  kept  a  love  for  his  own  country. 
He  had  not  the  heart  to  march  upon  the  Ultonians 
without  first  secretly  sending  a  messenger  to  warn 
them.  So  that,  though  all  the  other  champions  of 
the  Red  Branch  were  helpless,  Cuchulainn  was 
watching  the  marches  when  the  army  came. 

Now  begins  the  story  of  the  aristeia  of  the  Gaelic 
hero.  It  is,  after  the  manner  of  epics,  the  record  of 
a  series  of  single  combats,  in  each  of  which  Cuchu- 
lainn slays  his  adversary.  Man  after  man  comes 
against  him,  and  not  one  goes  back.  In  the  in- 
tervals between  these  duels,  Cuchulainn  harasses 
the  army  with  his  sling,  slaying  a  hundred  men  a 
day.  He  kills  Medb's  pet  dog,  bird,  and  squirrel, 
and  creates  such  terror  that  no  one  dares  to  stir  out 
of  the  camp.  Medb  herself  has  a  narrow  escape; 
for  one  of  her  serving  -  women,  who  puts  on  her 
mistress's  golden  head-dress,  is  killed  by  a  stone 
flung  from  Cuchulainn's  sling. 

The  great  queen  determines  to  see  with  her  own 
eyes  this  marvellous  hero  who  is  holding  all  her 
warriors  at  bay.  She  sends  an  envoy,  asking  him 
to  come  and  parley  with  her.  Cuchulainn  agrees, 
and,  at  the  meeting,  Medb  is  amazed  at  his  boyish 

*  This  prophecy  (here  much  abridged)  is,  in  the  original,  in  verse. 


1 68         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

look.  She  finds  it  hard  to  believe  that  it  is  this 
beardless  stripling  of  seventeen  who  is  killing  her 
champions,  until  the  whole  army  seems  as  though 
it  were  melting  away.  She  offers  him  her  own 
friendship  and  great  honours  and  possessions  in 
Connaught  if  he  will  forsake  Conchobar.  He  re- 
fuses; but  she  offers  it  again  and  again.  At  last 
Cuchulainn  indignantly  declares  that  the  next  man 
who  comes  with  such  a  message  will  do  so  at  his 
peril.  One  bargain,  however,  he  will  make.  He  is 
willing  to  fight  one  of  the  men  of  Ireland  every  day, 
and,  while  the  duel  lasts,  the  main  army  may  march 
on;  but,  as  soon  as  Cuchulainn  has  killed  his  man, 
it  must  halt  until  the  next  day.  Medb  agrees  to 
this,  thinking  it  better  to  lose  one  man  a  day  than  a 
hundred. 

Medb  makes  the  same  offer  to  every  famous  war- 
rior, to  induce  him  to  go  against  Cuchulainn.  The 
reward  for  the  head  of  the  champion  will  be  the 
hand  of  her  daughter,  Findabair^  In  spite  of  this, 
not  one  of  the  aspirants  to  the  princess  can  stand 
before  Cuchulainn.  All  perish;  and  Findabair, 
when  she  finds  out  how  she  is  being  promised  to  a 
fresh  suitor  every  day,  dies  of  shame.  But,  while 
Cuchulainn  is  engaged  in  these  combats,  Medb  sends 
men  who  scour  Ulster  for  the  brown  bull,  and  find 
him,  and  drive  him,  with  fifty  heifers,  into  her  camp. 

Meanwhile  the  ^s  Sidhe,  the  fairy  god-clan,  are 
watching  the  half-divine,  half-mortal  hero,  amazed 
at  his  achievements.  His  exploits  kindle  love  in  the 
fierce  heart  of  the  Morrigii,  the  great  war- goddess. 

*  Finnavdr. 


CUCHULAINN    MEETS    THE    MORRIGU 

After  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A.  - 


The  Irish  Iliad  169 

Cuchulainn  is  awakened  from  sleep  by  a  terrible 
shout  from  the  north.  He  orders  his  driver,  Laeg, 
to  yoke  the  horses  to  his  chariot,  so  that  he  may  find 
out  who  raised  it.  They  go  in  the  direction  from 
which  the  sound  had  come,  and  meet  with  a  woman 
in  a  chariot  drawn  by  a  red  horse.  She  has  red 
eyebrows,  and  a  red  dress,  and  a  long,  red  cloak, 
and  she  carries  a  great,  gray  spear.  He  asks  her 
who  she  is,  and  she  tells  him  that  she  is  a  king's 
daughter,  and  that  she  has  fallen  in  love  with  him 
through  hearing  of  his  exploits.  Cuchulainn  says 
that  he  has  other  things  to  think  of  than  love.  She 
replies  that  she  has  been  giving  him  her  help  in  his 
battles,  and  will  still  do  so;  and  Cuchulainn  answers 
that  he  does  not  need  any  woman's  help.  **Then," 
says  she,  ''  if  you  will  not  have  my  love  and  help, 
you  shall  have  my  hatred  and  enmity.  When  you 
are  fighting  with  a  warrior  as  good  as  yourself, 
I  will  come  against  you  in  various  shapes  and  hinder 
you,  so  that  he  shall  have  the  advantage."  Cuchu- 
lainn draws  his  sword,  but  all  he  sees  is  a  hoodie 
crow  sitting  on  a  branch.  He  knows  from  this  that 
the  red  woman  in  the  chariot  was  the  great  queen 
of  the  gods. 

The  next  day,  a  warrior  named  Loch  went  to 
meet  Cuchulainn.  At  first  he  refused  to  fight  one 
who  was  beardless;  so  Cuchulainn  smeared  his  chin 
with  blackberry  juice,  until  it  looked  as  though  he 
had  a  beard.  While  Cuchulainn  was  fighting  Loch, 
the  Morrigd  came  against  him  three  times — first  as 
a  heifer  which  tried  to  overthrow  him,  and  next  as 
an  eel  which  got  beneath  his  feet  as  he  stood  in 


170         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

running  water,  and  then  as  a  wolf  which  seized  hold 
of  his  right  arm.  But  Cuchulainn  broke  the  heifer  s 
leg,  and  trampled  upon  the  eel,  and  put  out  one  of 
the  wolfs  eyes,  though,  every  one  of  these  three 
times,  Loch  wounded  him.  In  the  end,  Cuchulainn 
slew  Loch  with  his  invincible  spear,  the  gae  bolg^^ 
made  of  a  sea-monster's  bones.  The  Morrfgu  came 
back  to  Cuchulainn,  disguised  as  an  old  woman,  to 
have  her  wounds  healed  by  him,  for  no  one  could 
cure  them  but  he  who  had  made  them.  She  became 
his  friend  after  this,  and  helped  him. 

But  the  fighting  was  so  continuous  that  Cuchu- 
lainn got  no  sleep,  except  just  for  a  while,  from 
time  to  time,  when  he  might  rest  a  little,  with  his 
head  on  his  hand  and  his  hand  on  his  spear  and  his 
spear  on  his  knee.  So  that  his  father,  Lugh  the  Long- 
handed,  took  pity  on  him  and  came  to  him  in  the 
semblance  of  a  tall,  handsome  man  in  a  green  cloak 
and  a  gold-embroidered  silk  shirt,  and  carrying  a 
black  shield  and  a  five-pronged  spear.  He  put  him 
into  a  sleep  of  three  days  and  three  nights,  and, 
while  he  rested,  he  laid  druidical  herbs  on  to  all  his 
wounds,  so  that,  in  the  end,  he  rose  up  again  com- 
pletely healed  and  as  strong  as  at  the  very  beginning 
of  the  war.  While  he  was  asleep,  the  boy-troop  of 
Emain  Macha,  Cuchulainns  old  companions,  came 
and  fought  instead  of  him,  and  slew  three  times  their 
own  number,  but  were  all  killed. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Medb  asked  Fergus  to 
go  and  fight  with  Cuchulainn.  Fergus  answered 
that  he  would  never  fight  against  his  own  foster- 

1  "  Bellows-dart",  apparently  a  kind  of  harpoon.     It  had  thirty  barbs. 


The  Irish  Iliad  171 

son.  Medb  asked  him  again  and  again,  and  at  last 
he  went,  but  without  his  famous  sword.  ''  Fergus, 
my  guardian,"  said  Cuchulainn,  ''it  is  not  safe  for 
you  to  come  out  against  me  without  your  sword." 
'*  If  I  had  the  sword,"  replied  Fergus,  ''  I  would  not 
use  it  on  you."  Then  Fergus  asked  Cuchulainn, 
for  the  sake  of  all  he  had  done  for  him  in  his  boy- 
hood, to  pretend  to  fight  with  him,  and  then  give 
way  before  him  and  run  away.  Cuchulainn  answered 
that  he  was  very  loth  to  be  seen  running  from  any 
man.  But  Fergus  promised  Cuchulainn  that,  if 
Cuchulainn  would  run  away  from  Fergus  then, 
Fergus  would  run  away  from  Cuchulainn  at  some 
future  time,  whenever  Cuchulainn  wished.  Cuchu- 
lainn agreed  to  this,  for  he  knew  that  it  would  be 
for  the  profit  of  Ulster.  So  they  fought  a  little, 
and  then  Cuchulainn  turned  and  fled  in  the  sight 
of  all  Medb's  army.  Fergus  went  back;  and  Medb 
could  not  reproach  him  any  more. 

But  she  cast  about  to  find  some  other  way  of 
vanquishing  Cuchulainn.  The  agreement  made  had 
been  that  only  one  man  a  day  should  be  sent  against 
him.  But  now  Medb  sent  the  wizard  Calatin  with 
his  twenty-seven  sons  and  his  grandson  all  at  once, 
for  she  said  *'they  are  really  only  one,  for  they  are 
all  from  Calatin's  body".  They  never  missed  a 
throw  with  their  poisoned  spears,  and  every  man 
they  hit  died,  either  on  the  spot  or  within  the  week. 
When  Fergus  heard  of  this,  he  was  in  great  grief, 
and  he  sent  a  man  called  Fiacha,  an  exile,  like  him- 
self, from  Ulster,  to  watch  the  fight  and  report  how 
it  went.     Now  Fiacha  did  not  mean  to  join  in  it. 


172         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

but  when  he  saw  Cuchulainn  assailed  by  twenty-nine 
at  a  time,  and  overpowered,  he  could  not  restrain 
himself.  So  he  drew  his  sword  and  helped  Cuchu- 
lainn, and,  between  them,  they  killed  Calatin  and  his 
whole  family. 

As  a  last  resource,  now,  Medb  sent  for  Ferdiad, 
who  was  the  great  champion  of  the  Iberian  "  Men 
of  Domnu",  who  had  thrown  in  their  lot  with  Medb 
in  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull.  Ferdiad  had  been 
a  companion  and  fellow-pupil  of  Cuchulainn  with 
Scathach,  and  he  did  not  wish  to  fight  with  him. 
But  Medb  told  him  that,  if  he  refused,  her  satirists 
should  make  such  lampoons  on  him  that  he  would 
die  of  shame,  and  his  name  would  be  a  reproach 
for  ever.  She  also  offered  him  great  rewards  and 
honours,  and  bound  herself  in  six  sureties  to  keep 
her  promises.     At  last,  reluctantly,  he  went. 

Cuchulainn  saw  him  coming,  and  went  out  to 
welcome  him;  but  Ferdiad  said  that  he  had  not 
come  as  a  friend,  but  to  fight.  Now  Cuchulainn 
had  been  Ferdiad's  junior  and  serving-boy  in  Sca- 
thach s  Island,  and  he  begged  him  by  the  memory 
of  those  old  times  to  go  back;  but  Ferdiad  said  he 
could  not.  They  fought  all  day,  and  neither  had 
gained  any  advantage  by  sunset.  So  they  kissed 
one  another,  and  each  went  back  to  his  camp.  Fer- 
diad sent  half  his  food  and  drink  to  Cuchulainn, 
and  Cuchulainn  sent  half  his  healing  herbs  and 
medicines  to  Ferdiad,  and  their  horses  were  put 
in  the  same  stable,  and  their  charioteers  slept  by 
the  same  fire.  And  so  it  happened  on  the  second 
day.     But  at  the  end  of  the  third  day  they  parted 


The  Irish  Iliad  173 

gloomily,  knowing  that  on  the  morrow  one  of  them 
must  fall ;  and  their  horses  were  not  put  in  the  same 
stall  that  night,  neither  did  their  charioteers  sleep  at 
the  same  fire.  On  the  fourth  day,  Cuchulainn  suc- 
ceeded in  killing  Ferdiad,  by  casting  the  gae  bolg 
at  him  from  underneath.  But  when  he  saw  that 
he  was  dying,  the  battle-fury  passed  away,  and  he 
took  his  old  companion  up  in  his  arms,  and  carried 
him  across  the  river  on  whose  banks  they  had 
fought,  so  that  he  might  be  with  the  men  of  Ulster 
in  his  death,  and  not  with  the  men  of  Ireland.  And 
he  wept  over  him,  and  said:  *'  It  was  all  a  game  and 
a  sport  until  Ferdiad  came ;  Oh,  Ferdiad !  your  death 
will  hang  over  me  like  a  cloud  for  ever.  Yesterday 
he  was  greater  than  a  mountain;  to-day  he  is  less 
than  a  shadow." 

By  this  time,  Cuchulainn  was  so  covered  with 
wounds  that  he  could  not  bear  his  clothes  to  touch 
his  skin,  but  had  to  hold  them  off  with  hazel-sticks, 
and  fill  the  spaces  in  between  with  grass.  There 
was  not  a  place  on  him  the  size  of  a  needle-point 
that  had  not  a  wound  on  it,  except  his  left  hand, 
which  held  the  shield. 

But  Sualtam,  Cuchulainn's  reputed  father,  had 
learned  what  a  sore  plight  his  son  was  in.  **  Do  I 
hear  the  heaven  bursting,  or  the  sea  running  away, 
or  the  earth  breaking  open,"  he  cried,  **or  is  it  my 
son's  groaning  that  I  hear?"  He  came  to  look  for 
him,  and  found  him  covered  with  wounds  and  blood. 
But  Cuchulainn  would  not  let  his  father  either  weep 
for  him  or  try  to  avenge  him.  '*  Go,  rather,"  he 
said  to  him,  ''  to  Emain  Macha,  and  tell  Conchobar 


174         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

that  I  can  no  longer  defend  Ulster  against  all  the 
four  provinces  of  Erin  without  help.  Tell  him  that 
there  is  no  part  of  my  body  on  which  there  is  not 
a  wound,  and  that,  if  he  wishes  to  save  his  kingdom, 
he  must  make  no  delay." 

Sualtam  mounted  Cuchulainn's  war-horse,  the 
"  Gray  of  Battle",  and  galloped  to  Emain  Macha. 
Three  times  he  shouted:  *' Men  are  being  killed, 
women  carried  off,  and  cattle  lifted  in  Ulster ". 
Twice  he  met  with  no  response.  The  third  time, 
Cathbad  the  Druid  roused  himself  from  his  lethargy 
to  denounce  the  man  who  was  disturbing  the  king's 
sleep.  In  his  indignation  Sualtam  turned  away  so 
sharply  that  the  gray  steed  reared,  and  struck  its 
rider's  shield  against  his  neck  with  such  force  that 
he  was  decapitated.  The  startled  horse  then  turned 
back  into  Conchobar's  stronghold,  and  dashed 
through  it,  Sualtam 's  severed  head  continuing  to 
cry  out:  *'  Men  are  being  killed,  women  carried  off, 
and  cattle  lifted  in  Ulster."  Such  a  portent  was 
enough  to  rouse  the  most  drowsy.  Conchobar, 
himself  again,  swore  a  great  oath.  "  The  heavens 
are  over  us,  the  earth  is  beneath  us,  and  the  sea 
circles  us  round,  and,  unless  the  heavens  fall,  with 
all  their  stars,  or  the  earth  gives  way  beneath  us, 
or  the  sea  bursts  over  the  land,  I  will  restore  every 
cow  to  her  stable,  and  every  woman  to  her  home." 

He  sent  messengers  to  rally  Ulster,  and  they 
gathered,  and  marched  on  the  men  of  Erin.  And 
then  was  fought  such  a  battle  as  had  never  been 
before  in  Ireland.  First  one  side,  then  the  other, 
gave  way  and  rallied  again,  until  Cuchulainn  heard 


The  Irish  Iliad  175 

the  noise  of  the  fight,  and  rose  up,  in  spite  of  all  his 
wounds,  and  came  to  it. 

He  called  out  to  Fergus,  reminding  him  how  he 
had  bound  himself  with  an  oath  to  run  from  him 
when  called  upon  to  do  so.  So  Fergus  ran  before 
Cuchulainn,  and  when  Medb's  army  saw  their  leader 
running  they  broke  and  fled  like  one  man. 

But  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cualgne  went  with  the 
army  into  Connaught,  and  there  he  met  Ailills 
bull,  the  White-horned.  And  he  fought  the  White- 
horned,  and  tore  him  limb  from  limb,  and  carried 
off  pieces  of  him  on  his  horns,  dropping  the  loins 
at  Athlone  and  the  liver  at  Trim.  Then  he  went 
back  to  Cualgne,  and  turned  mad,  killing  all  who 
crossed  his  path,  until  his  heart  burst  with  bellowing, 
and  he  fell  dead. 

This  was  the  end  of  the  great  war  called  Tdin  B6 
Chuailgni,  the  **  Driving  of  the  Cattle  of  Cooley  ". 

Yet,  wondrous  as  it  was,  it  was  not  the  most  mar- 
vellous of  Cuchulainn's  exploits.  Like  all  the  solar 
gods  and  heroes  of  Celtic  myth,  he  carried  his  con- 
quests into  the  dark  region  of  Hades.  On  this 
occasion  the  mysterious  realm  is  an  island  called 
Diln  Scaith,  that  is,  the  '*  Shadowy  Town ",  and 
though  its  king  is  not  mentioned  by  name,  it  seems 
likely  that  he  was  Mider,  and  that  Diin  Scaith  is 
another  name  for  the  Isle  of  Falga,  or  Man.  The 
story,  as  a  poem^  relates  it,  is  curiously  suggestive 
of  a  raid  which  the  powers  of  light,  and  especially 
the  sun-gods,  are  represented  as  having  made  upon 

lit  is  contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  story  called  the    "Phantom 
Chariot ". 


176         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Hades  in  kindred  British  myth.i  The  same  loath- 
some combatants  issue  out  of  the  underworld  to 
repel  its  assailants.  There  was  a  pit  in  the  centre 
of  Dun  Scaith,  out  of  which  swarmed  a  vast  throng 
of  serpents.  No  sooner  had  Cuchulainn  and  the 
heroes  of  Ulster  disposed  of  these  than  *'  a  house  full 
of  toads  "  was  loosed  upon  them — '*  sharp,  beaked 
monsters  "  (says  the  poem),  which  caught  them  by 
the  noses,  and  these  were  in  turn  replaced  by  fierce 
dragons.  Yet  the  heroes  prevailed  and  carried  off 
the  spoil — three  cows  of  magic  qualities  and  a 
marvellous  cauldron  in  which  was  always  found  an 
inexhaustible  supply  of  meat,  with  treasure  of  silver 
and  gold  to  boot.  They  started  back  for  Ireland  in 
a  coracle,  the  three  cows  being  towed  behind,  with 
the  treasure  in  bags  around  their  necks.  But  the 
gods  of  Hades  raised  a  storm  which  wrecked  their 
ship,  and  they  had  to  swim  home.  Here  Cuchulainn  s 
more  than  mortal  prowess  came  in  useful.  We  are 
told  that  he  floated  nine  men  to  shore  on  each  of  his 
hands,  and  thirty  on  his  head,  while  eight  more, 
clinging  to  his  sides,  used  him  as  a  kind  of  life-belt. 
After  this,  came  the  tragedy  of  Cuchulainn's 
career,  the  unhappy  duel  in  which  he  killed  his  only 
son,  not  knowing  who  he  was.  The  story  is  one 
common,  apparently,  to  the  Aryan  nations,  for  it  is 
found  not  only  in  the  Gaelic,  but  in  the  Teutonic 
and  Persian  mythic  traditions.  It  will  be  remem- 
bered that  Cuchulainn  defeated  a  rival  of  Scathach 
the  Amazon,  named  Aoife,  and  compelled  her  to 
render  submission.     The  hero  had  also  a  son  by 

^See  chap,  xx — "  The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness  ". 


rhe  Irish  Iliad  177 

Aoife,  and  he  asked  that  the  boy  should  be  called 
Conlaoch\  and  that,  when  he  was  of  age  to  travel, 
he  should  be  sent  to  Ireland  to  find  his  father. 
Aoife  promised  this,  but,  a  little  later,  news  came  to 
her  that  Cuchulainn  had  married  Emer.  Mad  with 
jealousy,  she  determined  to  make  the  son  avenge 
her  slight  upon  the  father.  She  taught  him  the 
craft  of  arms  until  there  was  no  more  that  he  could 
learn,  and  sent  him  to  Ireland.  Before  he  started, 
she  laid  three  geasa^  upon  him.  The  first  was  that 
he  was  not  to  turn  back,  the  second  that  he  was 
never  to  refuse  a  challenge,  and  the  third  that  he 
was  never  to  tell  his  name. 

He  arrived  at  Dundealgan^  Cuchulainn  s  home, 
and  the  warrior  Conall  came  down  to  meet  him, 
and  asked  him  his  name  and  lineage.  He  refused 
to  tell  them,  and  this  led  to  a  duel,  in  which  Conall 
was  disarmed  and  humiliated.  Cuchulainn  next 
approached  him,  asked  the  same  question,  and  re- 
ceived the  same  answer.  "  Yet  if  I  was  not  under 
a  command,"  said  Conlaoch,  who  did  not  know  he 
was  speaking  to  his  father,  "  there  is  no  man  in  the 
world  to  whom  I  would  sooner  tell  it  than  to  your- 
self, for  I  love  your  face."  Even  this  compliment 
could  not  stave  off  the  fight,  for  Cuchulainn  felt  it 
his  duty  to  punish  the  insolence  of  this  stripling  who 
refused  to  declare  who  he  was.  The  fight  was  a 
fierce  one,  and  the  invincible  Cuchulainn  found  him- 
self so  pressed  that  the  "hero-light"  shone  round 

1  Pronounced  Conla. 

2  A  kind  of  mystic  prohibition  or  taboo ;  singular,  gets. 

3  Now  called  Dundalk. 

(B219)  M 


178         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

him  and  transfigured  his  face.  When  Conlaoch  saw 
this,  he  knew  who  his  antagonist  must  be,  and  pur- 
posely flung  his  spear  slantways  that  it  might  not 
hit  his  father.  But  before  Cuchulainn  understood, 
he  had  thrown  the  terrible  gae  bolg,  Conlaoch, 
dying,  declared  his  name ;  and  so  passionate  was  Cu- 
chulainn s  grief  that  the  men  of  Ulster  were  afraid 
that  in  his  madness  he  might  wreak  his  wrath  upon 
them.  They,  therefore,  called  upon  Cathbad  the 
Druid  to  put  him  under  a  glamour.  Cathbad  turned 
the  waves  of  the  sea  into  the  appearance  of  armed 
men,  and  Cuchulainn  smote  them  with  his  sword 
until  he  fell  prone  from  weariness. 

It  would  take  too  long  to  relate  all  the  other 
adventures  and  exploits  of  Cuchulainn.  Enough 
has  been  done  if  any  reader  of  this  chapter  should 
be  persuaded  by  it  to  study  the  wonderful  saga  of 
ancient  Ireland  for  himself  We  must  pass  on 
quickly  to  its  tragical  close — the  hero's  death. 

Medb,  Queen  of  Connaught,  had  never  forgiven 
him  for  keeping  back  her  army  from  raiding  Ulster, 
and  for  slaying  so  many  of  her  friends  and  allies. 
So  she  went  secretly  to  all  those  whose  relations 
Cuchulainn  had  killed  (and  they  were  many),  and 
stirred  them  up  to  revenge. 

Besides  this,  she  had  sent  the  three  daughters  of 
Calatin  the  Wizard,  born  after  their  father's  death 
at  the  hands  of  Cuchulainn,  to  Alba  and  to  Babylon 
to  learn  witchcraft.  When  they  came  back  they 
were  mistresses  of  every  kind  of  sorcery,  and  could 
make  the  illusion  of  battle  with  an  incantation. 

And,  lest  she  might  fail  even  then,  she  waited 


The  Irish  Iliad  179 

with  patience  until  the  Ultonians  were  again  in  their 
magic  weakness,  and  there  was  no  one  to  help 
Cuchulainn  but  himself. 

Lugaid\  son  of  the  Curoi,  King  of  Munster 
whom  Cuchulainn  had  killed  for  the  sake  of  Blath- 
nat,  Mider's  daughter,  gathered  the  Munster  men; 
Ere,  whose  father  had  also  fallen  at  Cuchulainn's 
hands,  called  the  men  of  Meath;  the  King  of 
Leinster  brought  out  his  army;  and,  with  Ailill 
and  Medb  and  all  Connaught,  they  marched  into 
Ulster  again,  and  began  to  ravage  it. 

Conchobar  called  his  warriors  and  druids  into 
council,  to  see  if  they  could  find  some  means  of 
putting  off  war  until  they  were  ready  to  meet  it. 
He  did  not  wish  Cuchulainn  to  go  out  single- 
handed  a  second  time  against  all  the  rest  of  Ireland, 
for  he  knew  that,  if  the  champion  perished,  the 
prosperity  of  Ulster  would  fall  with  him  for  ever. 
So,  when  Cuchulainn  came  to  Emain  Macha,  the 
king  set  all  the  ladies,  singers,  and  poets  of  the 
court  to  keep  his  thoughts  from  war  until  the  men 
of  Ulster  had  recovered  from  their  weakness. 

But  while  they  sat  feasting  and  talking  in  the 
**  sunny  house  ",  the  three  daughters  of  Calatin  came 
fluttering  down  on  to  the  lawn  before  it,  and  began 
gathering  grass  and  thistles  and  puff-balls  and 
withered  leaves,  and  turning  them  into  the  semblance 
of  armies.  And,  by  the  same  magic,  they  caused 
shouts  and  shrieks  and  trumpet-blasts  and  the 
clattering  of  arms  to  be  heard  all  round  the  house, 
as  though  a  battle  were  being  fought, 

»  Pronounced  Lewy, 


i8o         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Cuchulainn  leaped  up,  red  with  shame  to  think 
that  fighting  should  be  going  on  without  his  help, 
and  seized  his  sword.  But  Cathbad's  son  caught 
him  by  the  arms.  All  the  druids  explained  to  him 
that  what  he  saw  was  only  an  enchantment  raised 
by  the  children  of  Calatin  to  draw  him  out  to  his 
death.  But  it  was  as  much  as  all  of  them  could  do 
to  keep  him  quiet  while  he  saw  the  phantom  armies 
and  heard  the  magic  sounds. 

So  they  decided  that  it  would  be  well  to  remove 
Cuchulainn  from  Emain  Macha  to  Glean-na-Bodhar^, 
the  **  Deaf  Valley ",  until  all  the  enchantments  of 
the  daughters  of  Calatin  were  spent.  It  was  the 
quality  of  this  valley  that,  if  all  the  men  of  Ireland 
were  to  shout  round  it  at  once,  no  one  within  it 
would  hear  a  sound. 

But  the  daughters  of  Calatin  went  there  too,  and 
again  they  took  thistles  and  puff-balls  and  withered 
leaves,  and  put  on  them  the  appearance  of  armed 
men;  so  that  there  seemed  to  be  no  place  outside 
the  whole  valley  that  was  not  filled  with  shouting 
battalions.  And  they  made  the  illusion  of  fires  all 
around  and  the  sound  of  women  shrieking.  Every- 
one who  heard  that  outcry  was  frightened  at  it,  not 
only  the  men  and  women,  but  even  the  dogs. 

Though  the  women  and  the  druids  shouted  back 
with  all  the  strength  of  their  voices,  to  drown  it 
they  could  not  keep  Cuchulainn  from  hearing. 
*'  Alas!"  he  cried,  ''  I  hear  the  men  of  Ireland  shout- 
ing as  they  ravage  the  province.  My  triumph  is  at 
an  end;  my  fame  is  gone;  Ulster  lies  low  for  ever." 

^  Pronounced  Glen  na  Mower. 


The  Irish  Iliad  i8i 

**  Let  it  pass,"  said  Cathbad;  **it  is  only  the  idle 
magic  noises  made  by  the  children  of  Calatin,  who 
want  to  draw  you  out,  to  put  an  end  to  you.  Stay 
here  with  us,  and  take  no  heed  of  them." 

Cuchulainn  obeyed;  and  the  daughters  of  Calatin 
went  on  for  a  long  time  filling  the  air  with  noises  of 
battle.  But  they  grew  tired  of  it  at  last;  for  they 
saw  that  the  druids  and  women  had  outwitted  them. 

They  did  not  succeed  until  one  of  them  took 
the  form  of  a  leman  of  Cuchulainn  s,  and  came  to 
him,  crying  out  that  Dundealgan  was  burnt,  and 
Muirthemne  ruined,  and  the  whole  province  of 
Ulster  ravaged.  Then,  at  last,  he  was  deceived, 
and  took  his  arms  and  armour,  and,  in  spite  of  all 
that  was  said  to  him,  he  ordered  Laeg  to  yoke  his 
chariot. 

Signs  and  portents  now  began  to  gather  as 
thickly  round  the  doomed  hero  as  they  did  round 
the  wooers  in  the  hall  of  Odysseus.  His  famous 
war-horse,  the  Gray  of  Macha,  refused  to  be  bridled, 
and  shed  large  tears  of  blood.  His  mother,  Dech- 
tir6,  brought  him  a  goblet  full  of  wine,  and  thrice 
the  wine  turned  into  blood  as  he  put  it  to  his  lips. 
At  the  first  ford  he  crossed,  he  saw  a  maiden  of  the 
sidhe  washing  clothes  and  armour,  and  she  told  him 
that  it  was  the  clothes  and  arms  of  Cuchulainn,  who 
was  soon  to  be  dead.  He  met  three  ancient  hags 
cooking  a  hound  on  spits  of  rowan,  and  they  invited 
him  to  partake  of  it.  He  refused,  for  it  was  taboo 
to  him  to  eat  the  flesh  of  his  namesake;  but  they 
shamed  him  into  doing  so  by  telling  him  that  he  ate 
at  rich  men's  tables  and  refused  the  hospitality  of 


1 82         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  poor.  The  forbidden  meat  paralysed  half  his 
body.  Then  he  saw  his  enemies  coming  up  against 
him  in  their  chariots. 

Cuchulainn  had  three  spears,  of  which  it  was 
prophesied  that  each  should  kill  a  king.  Three 
druids  were  charged  in  turn  to  ask  for  these  spears; 
for  it  was  not  thought  lucky  to  refuse  anything  to 
a  druid.  The  first  one  came  up  to  where  Cuchu- 
lainn was  making  the  plain  red  with  slaughter. 
**  Give  me  one  of  those  spears,"  he  said,  "or  I  will 
lampoon  you."  ''Take  it,"  replied  Cuchulainn,  "I 
have  never  yet  been  lampooned  for  refusing  anyone 
a  gift."  And  he  threw  the  spear  at  the  druid,  and 
killed  him.  But  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  got  the 
spear,  and  killed  Laeg  with  it  Laeg  was  the  king 
of  all  chariot-drivers. 

"  Give  me  one  of  your  spears,  Cuchulainn,"  said 
the  second  druid.  "  I  need  it  myself,"  he  replied. 
*'  I  will  lampoon  the  province  of  Ulster  because  of 
you,  if  you  refuse."  "  I  am  not  obliged  to  give 
more  than  one  gift  in  a  day,"  said  Cuchulainn,  "but 
Ulster  shall  never  be  lampooned  because  of  me." 
He  threw  the  spear  at  the  druid,  and  it  went 
through  his  head.  But  Ere,  King  of  Leinster,  got 
it,  and  mortally  wounded  the  Gray  of  Macha,  the 
king  of  all  horses. 

"  Give  me  your  spear,"  said  the  third  druid.  "  I 
have  paid  all  that  is  due  from  myself  and  Ulster," 
replied  Cuchulainn.  "  I  will  satirize  your  kindred 
if  you  do  not,"  said  the  druid.  "  I  shall  never  go 
home,  but  I  will  be  the  cause  of  no  lampoons  there," 
answered  Cuchulainn,  and  he  threw  the  spear  at  the 


The  Irish  Iliad  183 

asker,  and  killed  him.  But  Lugaid  threw  it  back, 
and  it  went  through  Cuchulainn  s  body,  and  wounded 
him  to  the  death. 

Then,  in  his  agony,  he  greatly  desired  to  drink. 
He  asked  his  enemies  to  let  him  go  to  a  lake  that 
lay  close  by,  and  quench  his  thirst,  and  then  come 
back  again.  **  If  I  cannot  come  back  to  you,  come 
to  fetch  me,"  he  said;  and  they  let  him  go. 

Cuchulainn  drank,  and  bathed,  and  came  out  of 
the  water.  But  he  found  that  he  could  not  walk; 
so  he  called  to  his  enemies  to  come  to  him.  There 
was  a  pillar-stone  near;  and  he  bound  himself  to  it 
with  his  belt,  so  that  he  might  die  standing  up,  and 
not  lying  down.  His  dying  horse,  the  Gray  of 
Macha,  came  back  to  fight  for  him,  and  killed  fifty 
men  with  his  teeth  and  thirty  with  each  of  his  hoofs. 
But  the  ** hero-light"  had  died  out  of  Cuchulainn s 
face,  leaving  it  as  pale  as  ''a  one-night's  snow",  and 
a  crow  came  and  perched  upon  his  shoulder. 

**  Truly  it  was  not  upon  that  pillar  that  birds  used 
to  sit,"  said  Ere. 

Now  that  they  were  certain  that  Cuchulainn  was 
dead,  they  all  gathered  round  him,  and  Lugaid  cut 
off  his  head  to  take  it  to  Medb.  But  vengeance 
came  quickly,  for  Conall  the  Victorious  was  in 
pursuit,  and  he  made  a  terrible  slaughter  of  Cuchu- 
lainn's  enemies. 

Thus  perished  the  great  hero  of  the  Gaels  in  the 
twenty-seventh  year  of  his  age.  And  with  him  fell 
the  prosperity  of  Emain  Macha  and  of  the  Red 
Branch  of  Ulster. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

SOME   GAELIC    LOVE-STORIES 

The  heroic  age  of  Ireland  was  not,  however,  the 
mere  orgy  of  battle  which  one  might  assume  from 
the  previous  chapter.  It  had  room  for  its  Helen 
and  its  Andromache  as  well  as  for  its  Achilles  and 
its  Hector.  Its  champions  could  find  time  to  make 
love  as  well  as  war.  More  than  this,  the  legends  of 
their  courtships  often  have  a  romantic  beauty  found 
in  no  other  early  literature.  The  women  have  free 
scope  of  choice,  and  claim  the  respect  of  their 
wooers.  Indeed,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the 
mythical  stories  of  the  Celts  must  have  created  the 
chivalrous  romances  of  mediaeval  Europe.  In  them, 
and  in  no  other  previous  literature,  do  we  find  such 
knightly  treatment  of  an  enemy  as  we  see  in  the 
story  of  Cuchulainn  and  Ferdiad,  or  such  poetic 
delicacy  towards  a  woman  as  is  displayed  in  the 
wooing  of  Emer.^  The  talk  between  man  and 
maid  when  Cuchulainn  comes  in  his  chariot  to  pay 
his  suit  to  Emer  at  Forgall's  diln  might,  save  for  its 
strangeness,  almost  have  come  out  of  some  quite 
modern  romance. 

1  The  romance  of  the  Wooing  of  Emer,  a  fragment  of  which  is  contained  in  the 
Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Kuno  Meyer,  and  published  by 
him  in  the  Archceological  Review,  Vol.  I,  1888.  Miss  Hull  has  included  this 
translation  in  her  Cuchullin  Saga.  Another  version  of  it  from  a  Bodleian  MS., 
translated  by  the  same  scholar,  will  be  found  in  the  Revue  Celtique,  Vol.  XI. 

184 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  185 

*'  Emer  lifted  up  her  lovely  face  and  recognised 
Cuchulainn,  and  she  said,  *  May  God  make  smooth 
the  path  before  you!' 

"*And  you,'  he  said,  'may  you  be  safe  from 
every  harm.' " 

She  asks  him  whence  he  has  come,  and  he  tells 
her.     Then  he  questions  her  about  herself. 

'*  I  am  a  Tara  of  women,"  she  replies,  "the 
whitest  of  maidens,  one  who  is  gazed  at  but  who 
gazes  not  back,  a  rush  too  far  to  be  reached,  an 
untrodden  way.  ...  I  was  brought  up  in  ancient 
virtues,  in  lawful  behaviour,  in  the  keeping  of 
chastity,  in  rank  equal  to  a  queen,  in  stateliness  of 
form,  so  that  to  me  is  attributed  every  noble  grace 
among  the  hosts  of  Erin's  women."  In  more  boast- 
ful strain  Cuchulainn  tells  of  his  own  birth  and 
deeds.  Not  like  the  son  of  a  peasant  had  he  been 
reared  at  Conchobar's  court,  but  among  heroes  and 
champions,  jesters  and  druids.  When  he  is  weakest 
his  strength  is  that  of  twenty;  alone  he  will  fight 
against  forty;  a  hundred  men  would  feel  safe  under 
his  protection.  One  can  imagine  Emer's  smile  as 
she  listens  to  these  braggings.  *'  Truly,"  she  says, 
**  they  are  goodly  feats  for  a  tender  boy,  but  they 
are  not  yet  those  of  chariot-chiefs."  Very  modern, 
too,  is  the  way  in  which  she  coyly  reminds  her 
wooer  that  she  has  an  elder  sister  as  yet  unwed. 
But,  when  at  last  he  drives  her  to  the  point,  she 
answers  him  with  gentle,  but  proud  decision.  Not 
by  words,  but  by  deeds  is  she  to  be  won.  The  man 
she  will  marry  must  have  his  name  mentioned 
wherever  the  exploits  of  heroes  are  spoken  of. 


1 86         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"  Even  as  thou  hast  commanded,  so  shall  all  by 
me  be  done,"  said  Cuchulainn. 

*'And  by  me  your  offer  is  accepted,  it  is  taken, 
it  is  granted,"  replied  Emer. 

It  seems  a  pity  that,  after  so  fine  a  wooing, 
Cuchulainn  could  not  have  kept  faithful  to  the  bride 
he  won.  Yet  such  is  not  the  way  of  heroes  whom 
goddesses  as  well  as  mortal  women  conspire  to 
tempt  from  their  loyalty.  Fand,  the  wife  of  Man- 
anndn  son  of  Ler,  deserted  by  the  sea-god,  sent 
her  sister  Liban  to  Cuchulainn  as  an  ambassador  of 
love.  At  first  he  refused  to  visit  her,  but  ordered 
Laeg,  his  charioteer,  to  go  with  Liban  to  the 
"  Happy  Plain "  to  spy  out  the  land.  Laeg  re- 
turned enraptured.  '*  If  all  Ireland  were  mine," 
he  assured  his  master,  **  with  supreme  rule  over 
its  fair  inhabitants,  I  would  give  it  up  without 
regret  to  go  and  live  in  the  place  that  I  have 
seen." 

So  Cuchulainn  himself  went  and  stayed  a  month 
in  the  Celtic  Paradise  with  Fand,  the  fairest  woman 
of  the  Sidhe.  Returning  to  the  land  of  mortals,  he 
made  a  tryst  with  the  goddess  to  meet  him  again  in 
his  own  country  by  the  yew-tree  at  the  head  of 
Baile  s  strand. 

But  Emer  came  to  hear  of  it,  and  went  to  the 
meeting-place  herself,  with  fifty  of  her  maidens,  each 
armed  with  a  knife  to  kill  her  rival.  There  she 
found  Cuchulainn,   Laeg,  and  Fand. 

*'  What  has  led  you,  Cuchulainn,"  said  Emer,  *'  to 
shame  me  before  the  women  of  Erin  and  all  honour- 
able people  .^^      I  came  under  your  shelter,  trusting 


CUCHULAINN    REBUKED    BY    EMER 

From  the  Draivin^  by  H.  R.  Miliar 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  187 

in  your  faithfulness,  and  now  you  seek  a  cause  of 
quarrel  with  me." 

But  Cuchulainn,  hero-like,  could  not  understand 
why  his  wife  should  not  be  content  to  take  her  turn 
with  this  other  woman — surely  no  unworthy  rival, 
for  she  was  beautiful,  and  came  of  the  lofty  race  of 
gods.  We  see  Emer  yield  at  last,  with  queenly 
pathos. 

**  I  will  not  refuse  this  woman  to  you,  if  you  long 
for  her,"  she  said,  for  I  know  that  everything  that 
is  new  seems  fair,  and  everything  that  is  common 
seems  bitter,  and  everything  we  have  not  seems 
desirable  to  us,  and  everything  we  have  we  think 
little  of  And  yet,  Cuchulainn,  I  was  once  pleasing 
to  you,  and  I  would  wish  to  be  so  again." 

Her  grief  touched  him.  **  By  my  word,"  he  said, 
"you  are  pleasing  to  me,  and  will  be  as  long  as  I 
live." 

"Then  let  me  be  given  up,"  said  Fand.  "It  is 
better  that  I  should  be,"  replied  Emer.  "No,"  said 
Fand;  "  it  is  I  who  must  be  given  up  in  the  end. 

"It  is  I  who  will  go,  though  I  go  with  great 
sorrow.  I  would  rather  stay  with  Cuchulainn  than 
live  in  the  sunny  home  of  the  gods. 

"  O  Emer,  he  is  yours,  and  you  are  worthy  of 
him!  What  my  hand  cannot  have,  my  heart  may 
yet  wish  well  to. 

"A  sorrowful  thing  it  is  to  love  without  return. 
Better  to  renounce  than  not  to  receive  a  love  equal 
to  one's  own. 

"  It  was  not  well  of  you,  O  fair-haired  Emer,  to 
come  to  kill  Fand  in  her  misery." 


1 88         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

It  was  while  the  goddess  and  the  human  woman 
were  contending  with  one  another  in  self-sacrifice 
that  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  heard  of  Fand's 
trouble,  and  was  sorry  that  he  had  forsaken  her. 
So  he  came,  invisible  to  all  but  her  alone.  He 
asked  her  pardon,  and  she  herself  could  not  forget 
that  she  had  once  been  happy  with  the  "horseman 
of  the  crested  waves ",  and  still  might  be  happy 
with  him  again.  The  god  asked  her  to  make  her 
choice  between  them,  and,  when  she  went  to  him, 
he  shook  his  mantle  between  her  and  Cuchulainn. 
It  was  one  of  the  magic  properties  of  Manannan  s 
mantle  that  those  between  whom  it  was  shaken 
could  never  meet  again.  Then  Fand  returned  with 
her  divine  husband  to  the  country  of  the  immortals; 
and  the  druids  of  Emain  Macha  gave  Cuchulainn 
and  Emer  each  a  drink  of  oblivion,  so  that  Cuchu- 
lainn forgot  his  love  and  Emer  her  jealousy.^ 

The  scene  of  this  story  takes  its  name  from 
another,  and  hardly  less  beautiful  love -tale.  The 
**  yew-tree  at  the  head  of  Baile's  strand  "  had  grown 
out  of  the  grave  of  Baile  of  the  Honeyed  Speech, 
and  it  bore  the  appearance  of  Baile's  love,  Ailinn. 
This  Gaelic  Romeo  and  Juliet  were  of  royal  birth: 
Baile  was  heir  to  Ulster,  and  Ailinn  was  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Leinster's  son.  Not  by  any  feud 
of  Montague  and  Capulet  were  they  parted,  how- 
ever, but  by  the  craft  of  a  ghostly  enemy.  They 
had  appointed  to  meet  one  another  at  Dundealgan, 

1  This  story,  known  as  the  Sick-Bed  of  Cuchulainn,  translated  into  French  by 
M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  will  be  found  in  his  LEpopie  Celtique  en  IrlancU,  the  fifth 
volume  of  Cour  de  Littirature  Celtique.  Another  translation,  into  English,  bv 
Eugene  O'Curry  is  in  Atlantis,  Vols.  I  and  H. 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  189 

and  Baile,  who  arrived  there  first,  was  greeted  by  a 
stranger.  **  What  news  do  you  bring?"  asked  Baile. 
**  None,"  replied  the  stranger,  '*  except  that  Ailinn 
of  Leinster  was  setting  out  to  meet  her  lover,  but 
the  men  of  Leinster  kept  her  back,  and  her  heart 
broke  then  and  there  from  grief."  When  Baile 
heard  this,  his  own  heart  broke,  and  he  fell  dead 
on  the  strand,  while  the  messenger  went  on  the 
wings  of  the  wind  to  the  home  of  Ailinn,  who  had 
not  yet  started.  **  Whence  come  you?"  she  asked 
him.  "  From  Ulster,  by  the  shore  of  Dundealgan, 
where  I  saw  men  raising  a  stone  over  one  who  had 
just  died,  and  on  the  stone  I  read  the  name  of  Baile. 
He  had  come  to  meet  some  woman  he  was  in  love 
with,  but  it  was  destined  that  they  should  never  see 
one  another  again  in  life."  At  this  news  Ailinn,  too, 
fell  dead,  and  was  buried;  and  we  are  told  that  an 
apple-tree  grew  out  of  her  grave,  the  apples  of  which 
bore  the  likeness  of  the  face  of  Baile,  while  a  yew- 
tree  sprung  from  Baile's  grave,  and  took  the  appear- 
ance of  Ailinn.  This  legend,  which  is  probably  a 
part  of  the  common  heritage  of  the  Aryans,  is  found 
in  folk-lore  over  an  area  which  stretches  from  Ireland 
to  India.  The  Gaelic  version  has,  however,  an  end- 
ing unknown  to  the  others.  The  two  trees,  it  relates, 
were  cut  down,  and  made  into  wands  upon  which 
the  poets  of  Ulster  and  of  Leinster  cut  the  songs  of 
the  love-tragedies  of  their  two  provinces,  in  ogam. 
But  even  these  mute  memorials  of  Baile  and  Ailinn 
were  destined  not  to  be  divided.  After  two  hundred 
years,  Art  the  "Lonely",  High-King  of  Ireland, 
ordered  them  to  be  brought  to  the  hall  of  Tara, 


190         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

and,  as  soon  as  the  wands  found  themselves  under 
the  same  roof,  they  all  sprang  together,  and  no  force 
or  skill  could  part  them  again.  So  the  king  com- 
manded them  to  be  **  kept,  like  any  other  jewel,  in 
the  treasury  of  Tara."^ 

Neither  of  these  stories,  however,  has  as  yet 
attained  the  fame  of  one  now  to  be  retold.^  To 
many,  no  doubt,  Gaelic  romance  is  summed  up  in 
the  one  word  Deirdre.  It  is  the  legend  of  this 
Gaelic  Helen  that  the  poets  of  the  modern  Celtic 
school  most  love  to  elaborate,  while  old  men  still  tell 
it  round  the  peat-fires  of  Ireland  and  the  Highlands. 
Scholar  and  peasant  alike  combine  to  preserve  a 
tradition  no  one  knows  how  many  hundred  years 
old,  for  it  was  written  down  in  the  twelfth-century 
Book  of  Leinster  as  one  of  the  *' prime  stories'* 
which  every  bard  was  bound  to  be  able  to  recite 
It  takes  rank  with  the  ''  Fate  of  the  Sons  of  Tui- 
renn  ",  and  with  the  **  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Ler  ", 
as  one  of  the  ''  Three  Sorrowful  Stories  of  Erin  ". 

So  favourite  a  tale  has  naturally  been  much  altered 
and  added  to  in  its  passage  down  the  generations. 
But  its  essential  story  is  as  follows: — 

King  Conchobar  of  Ulster  was  holding  festival  in 
the  house  of  one  of  his  bards,  called  Fedlimid,  when 
Fedlimid  s  wife  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,  concerning 
whom  Cathbad  the  Druid  uttered  a  prophecy.      He 

1  For  the  full  story  of  Baile  and  Ailinn  see  Dr.  Kuno  Meyer's  translation  in 
Vol.  XIII  of  the  Revue  Celtique. 

^  There  are  not  only  numerous  translations  of  this  romance,  but  also  many 
Gaelic  versions.  The  oldest  of  the  latter  is  in  the  Book  of  Leinster,  while  the  fullest 
are  in  two  MSS.  in  the  Advocates'  Library  at  Edinburgh.  The  version  followed 
here  is  from  one  of  these,  the  so-called  Glenn  Masdin  MS.,  translated  by  Dr. 
Whitley  Stokes,  and  contained  in  Miss  Hull's  Cuchullin  Sa^a, 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  191 

foretold  that  the  new-born  child  would  grow  up  to 
be  the  most  lovely  woman  the  world  had  ever 
seen,  but  that  her  beauty  would  bring  death  to 
many  heroes,  and  much  peril  and  sorrow  to  Ulster. 
On  bearing  this,  the  Red  Branch  warriors  demanded 
that  she  should  be  killed,  but  Conchobar  refused, 
and  gave  the  infant  to  a  trusted  serving-woman, 
to  be  hidden  in  a  secret  place  in  the  solitude  of 
the  mountains,  until  she  was  of  an  age  to  be  his 
own  wife. 

So  Deirdre  (as  Cathbad  named  her)  was  taken 
away  to  a  hut  so  remote  from  the  paths  of  men  that 
none  knew  of  it  save  Conchobar.  Here  she  was 
brought  up  by  a  nurse,  a  fosterer,  and  a  teacher, 
and  saw  no  other  living  creatures  save  the  beasts 
and  birds  of  the  hills.  Nevertheless,  woman-like, 
she  aspired  to  be  loved. 

One  day,  her  fosterer  was  killing  a  calf  for  their 
food,  and  its  blood  ran  out  upon  the  snowy  ground, 
which  brought  a  black  raven  swooping  to  the  spot. 
*' If  there  were  a  man,"  said  Deirdre,  **who  had 
hair  of  the  blackness  of  that  raven,  skin  of  the 
whiteness  of  the  snow,  and  cheeks  as  red  as  the 
calf's  blood,  that  is  the  man  whom  I  would  wish 
to  marry  me." 

**  Indeed  there  is  such  a  man,"  replied  her  teacher 
thoughtlessly.  **  Naoise^  one  of  the  sons  of  Usnach^ 
heroes  of  the  same  race  as  Conchobar  the  King. 

The  curious  Deirdre  prevailed  upon  her  teacher 
to  bring  Naoise  to  speak  with  her.  When  they 
met  she  made  good  use  of  her  time,  for  she  offered 

^  Pronounced  Naisi.  ^  Pronounced  Usna. 


192  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Naoise  her  love,  and  begged  him  to  take  her  away 
from  King  Conchobar. 

Naoise,  bewitched  by  her  beauty,  consented. 
Accompanied  by  his  two  brothers,  Ardan  and 
Ainle,  and  their  followers,  he  fled  with  Deirdre 
to  Alba,  where  they  made  alliance  with  one  of  its 
kings,  and  wandered  over  the  land,  living  by  follow- 
ing the  deer,  and  by  helping  the  king  in  his  battles. 

The  revengeful  Conchobar  bided  his  time.  One 
day,  as  the  heroes  of  the  Red  Branch  feasted  to- 
gether at  Emain  Macha,  he  asked  them  if  they  had 
ever  heard  of  a  nobler  company  than  their  own. 
They  replied  that  the  world  could  not  hold  such 
another.  **Yet",  said  the  king,  '*we  lack  our  full 
tale.  The  three  sons  of  Usnach  could  defend  the 
province  of  Ulster  against  any  other  province  of 
Ireland  by  themselves,  and  it  is  a  pity  that  they 
should  still  be  exiles,  for  the  sake  of  any  woman 
in  the  world.     Gladly  would  I  welcome  them  back!" 

*'We  ourselves",  replied  the  Ultonians,  ''would 
have  counselled  this  long  ago  had  we  dared,  O 
King!" 

'*  Then  I  will  send  one  of  my  three  best  champions 
to  fetch  them,"  said  Conchobar.  **  Either  Conall 
the  Victorious,  or  Cuchulainn,  the  son  of  Sualtam, 
or  Fergus,  the  son  of  Roy ;  and  I  will  find  out  which 
of  those  three  loves  me  best." 

First  he  called  Conall  to  him  secretly. 

''What  would  you  do,  O  Conall,"  he  asked,  "if 
you  were  sent  to  fetch  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  they 
were  killed  here,  in  spite  of  your  safe-conduct?" 

"There  is  not  a  man  in  Ulster,"  answered  Conall, 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  193 

*'  who  had  hand  in  it  that  would  escape  his  own 
death  from  me." 

''  I  see  that  I  am  not  dearest  of  all  men  to  you," 
replied  Conchobar,  and,  dismissing  Conall,  he  called 
Cuchulainn,  and  put  the  same  question  to  him. 

'*  By  my  sworn  word,"  replied  Cuchulainn,  *' if 
such  a  thing  happened  with  your  consent,  no  bribe 
or  blood-fine  would  I  accept  in  lieu  of  your  own 
head,  O  Conchobar." 

**  Truly,"  said  the  king,  **  it  is  not  you  I  will 
send." 

The  king  then  asked  Fergus,  and  he  replied 
that,  if  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  slain  while  under 
his  protection,  he  would  revenge  the  deed  upon 
anyone  who  was  party  to  it,  save  only  the  king 
himself. 

"  Then  it  is  you  who  shall  go,"  said  Conchobar. 
**  Set  forth  to-morrow,  and  rest  not  by  the  way, 
and  when  you  put  foot  again  in  Ireland  at  the 
Diin  of  Borrach,  whatever  may  happen  to  you 
yourself,  send  the  sons  of  Usnach  forward  with- 
out delay." 

The  next  morning,  Fergus,  with  his  two  sons, 
Illann  the  Fair  and  Buinne  the  Ruthless  Red,  set 
out  for  Alba  in  their  galley,  and  reached  Loch 
Etive,  by  whose  shores  the  sons  of  Usnach  were 
then  living.  Naoise,  Ainle,  and  Ardan  were  sitting 
at  chess  when  they  heard  Fergus's  shout. 

*'  That  is  the  cry  of  a  man  of  Erin,"  said  Naoise. 

"  Nay,"  replied  Deirdre,  who  had  forebodings  of 
trouble.  **  Do  not  heed  it;  it  is  only  the  shout  of  a 
man  of  Alba."     But  the  sons  of  Usnach  knew  better, 

(B219)  N 


194         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

and  sent  Ardan  down  to  the  sea-shore,  where  he 
found  Fergus  and  his  sons,  and  gave  them  greet- 
ing, and  heard  their  message,  and  brought  them 
back  with  him. 

That  night  Fergus  persuaded  the  sons  of  Usnach 
to  return  with  him  to  Emain  Macha.  Deirdre,  with 
her  "•  second  sight ",  implored  them  to  remain  in 
Alba.  But  the  exiles  were  weary  for  the  sight  of 
their  own  country,  and  did  not  share  their  com- 
panion's fears.  As  they  put  out  to  sea,  Deirdre 
uttered  her  beautiful  "  Farewell  to  Alba  ",  that  land 
she  was  never  to  behold  again. 

"  A  lovable  land  is  yon  eastern  land, 
Alba,  with  its  marvels. 
I  would  not  have  come  hither  out  of  it, 
Had  I  not  come  with  Naoise. 

"  Lovable  are  Dun-fidga  and  Dun-finn, 
Lovable  the  fortress  over  them ; 
Dear  to  the  heart  Inis  Draigende, 
And  very  dear  is  Dun  Suibni. 

"Caill  Cuan! 
Unto  which  Ainle  would  wend,  alas! 
Short  the  time  seemed  to  me, 
With  Naoise  in  the  region  of  Alba. 

"Glenn  Laid! 
Often  I  slept  there  under  the  cliff; 
Fish  and  venison  and  the  fat  of  the  badger 
Was  my  portion  in  Glenn  Ldid. 

"Glenn  Masdin! 
Its  garlic  was  tall,  its  branches  white; 
We  slept  a  rocking  sleep. 
Over  the  grassy  estuary  of  Masdin. 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  195 

"  Glenn  Etive ! 
Where  my  first  house  I  raised; 
Beauteous  its  wood: — upon  rising 
A  cattle-fold  for  the  sun  was  Glenn  Etive. 


"Glenn  Da-Ruad! 
My  love  to  every  man  who  hath  it  as  an  heritage! 
Sweet  the  cuckoos'  note  on  bending  bough, 
On  the  peak  over  Glenn  Da-Ruad. 

"  Beloved  is  Draigen, 
Dear  the  white  sand  beneath  its  waves; 
I  would  not  have  come  from  it,  from  the  East, 
Had  I  not  come  with  my  beloved." 

They  crossed  the  sea,  and  arrived  at  the  DUn  oi 
Borrach,  v^ho  bade  them  v^^elcome  to  Ireland.  Now 
King  Conchobar  had  sent  Borrach  a  secret  com- 
mand, that  he  should  offer  a  feast  to  Fergus  on  his 
landing.  Strange  taboos  called  geasa  are  laid  upon 
the  various  heroes  of  ancient  Ireland  in  the  stories; 
there  are  certain  things  that  each  one  of  them  may 
not  do  v^ithout  forfeiting  life  or  honour;  and  it  was 
a  geis  upon  Fergus  to  refuse  a  feast. 

Fergus,  we  are  told,  **  reddened  with  anger  from 
crown  to  sole  "  at  the  invitation.  Yet  he  could  not 
avoid  the  feast.  He  asked  Naoise  what  he  should 
do,  and  Deirdre  broke  in  with:  "Do  what  is  asked 
of  you  if  you  prefer  to  forsake  the  sons  of  Usnach 
for  a  feast.  Yet  forsaking  them  is  a  good  price  to 
pay  for  it." 

Fergus,  however,  perceived  a  possible  compro- 
mise. Though  he  himself  could  not  refuse  to  stop 
to  partake  of  Borrach  s  hospitality,  he  could  send 


196         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Deirdre  and  the  sons  of  Usnach  on  to  Emain 
Macha  at  once,  under  the  safeguard  of  his  two  sons, 
Illann  the  Fair  and  Buinne  the  Ruthless  Red.  So 
this  was  done,  albeit  to  the  annoyance  of  the  sons 
of  Usnach  and  the  terror  of  Deirdre.  Visions  came 
to  the  sorrowful  woman;  she  saw  the  three  sons  of 
Usnach  and  Illann,  the  son  of  Fergus,  without  their 
heads;  she  saw  a  cloud  of  blood  always  hanging 
over  them.  She  begged  them  to  wait  in  some  safe 
place  until  Fergus  had  finished  the  feast.  But 
Naoise,  Ainle,  and  Ardan  laughed  at  her  fears. 
They  arrived  at  Emain  Macha,  and  Conchobar 
ordered  the  '*  Red  Branch "  palace  to  be  placed  at 
their  disposal. 

In  the  evening  Conchobar  called  Levarcham, 
Deirdre  s  old  teacher,  to  him.  **Go",  he  said,  '*to 
the  '  Red  Branch ',  and  see  Deirdre,  and  bring  me 
back  news  of  her  appearance,  whether  she  still 
keeps  her  former  beauty,  or  whether  it  has  left  her." 

So  Levarcham  came  to  the  ''  Red  Branch  ",  and 
kissed  Deirdre  and  the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and 
warned  them  that  Conchobar  was  preparing  treach- 
ery. Then  she  went  back  to  the  king,  and  reported 
to  him  that  Deirdre's  hard  life  upon  the  mountains 
of  Alba  had  ruined  her  form  and  face,  so  that  she 
was  no  longer  worthy  of  his  regard. 

At  this,  Conchobar's  jealousy  was  partly  allayed, 
and  he  began  to  doubt  whether  it  would  be  wise  to 
attack  the  sons  of  Usnach.  But  later  on,  when  he 
had  drunk  well  of  wine,  he  sent  a  second  messenger 
to  see  if  what  Levarcham  had  reported  about  Deir- 
dre was  truth. 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  197 

The  messenger,  this  time  a  man,  went  and  looked 
in  through  a  window.  Deirdre  saw  him  and  pointed 
him  out  to  Naoise,  who  flung  a  chessman  at  the  peer- 
ing face,  and  put  out  one  of  its  eyes.  But  the  man 
went  back  to  Conchobar,  and  told  him  that,  though 
one  of  his  eyes  had  been  struck  out,  he  would  gladly 
have  stayed  looking  with  the  other,  so  great  was 
Deirdre's  loveliness. 

Then  Conchobar,  in  his  wrath,  ordered  the  men 
of  Ulster  to  set  fire  to  the  Red  Branch  House  and 
slay  all  within  it  except  Deirdre.  They  flung  fire- 
brands upon  it,  but  Buinne  the  Ruthless  Red  came 
out  and  quenched  them,  and  drove  the  assailants 
back  with  slaughter.  But  Conchobar  called  to  him 
to  parley,  and  offered  him  a  ''hundred"  of  land  and 
his  friendship  to  desert  the  sons  of  Usnach.  Buinne 
was  tempted,  and  fell;  but  the  land  given  him 
turned  barren  that  very  night  in  indignation  at 
being  owned  by  such  a  traitor. 

The  other  of  Fergus's  sons  was  of  different  make. 
He  charged  out,  torch  in  hand,  and  cut  down  the 
Ultonians,  so  that  they  hesitated  to  come  near  the 
house  again.  Conchobar  dared  not  offer  him  a 
bribe.  But  he  armed  his  own  son,  Fiacha,  with 
his  own  magic  weapons,  including  his  shield,  the 
*'  Moaner",  which  roared  when  its  owner  was  in 
danger,  and  sent  him  to  fight  Illann. 

The  duel  was  a  fierce  one,  and  Illann  got  the 
better  of  Fiacha,  so  that  the  son  of  Conchobar  had 
to  crouch  down  beneath  his  shield,  which  roared  for 
help.  Conall  the  Victorious  heard  the  roar  from  far 
off,  and  thought  that  his  king  must  be  in  peril.     He 


198         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

came  to  the  place,  and,  without  asking  questions, 
thrust  his  spear  *'  Blue-green  "  through  Illann.  The 
dying  son  of  Fergus  explained  the  situation  to 
Conall,  who,  by  way  of  making  some  amends,  at 
once  killed  Fiacha  as  well. 

After  this,  the  sons  of  Usnach  held  their  fort  till 
dawn  against  all  Conchobar  s  host.  But,  with  day, 
they  saw  that  they  must  either  escape  or  resign 
themselves  to  perish.  Putting  Deirdre  in  their 
centre,  protected  by  their  shields,  they  opened  the 
door  suddenly  and  fled  out. 

They  would  have  broken  through  and  escaped, 
had  not  Conchobar  asked  Cathbad  the  Druid  to 
put  a  spell  upon  them,  promising  to  spare  their 
lives.  So  Cathbad  raised  the  illusion  of  a  stormy 
sea  before  and  all  around  the  sons  of  Usnach. 
Naoise  lifted  Deirdre  upon  his  shoulder,  but  the 
magic  waves  rose  higher,  until  they  were  all  obliged 
to  fling  away  their  weapons  and  swim. 

Then  was  seen  the  strange  sight  of  men  swim- 
ming upon  dry  land.  And,  before  the  glamour 
passed  away,  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  seized  from 
behind,  and  brought  to  Conchobar. 

In  spite  of  his  promise  to  the  druid,  the  king 
condemned  them  to  death.  None  of  the  men  of 
Ulster  would,  however,  deal  the  blow.  In  the  end, 
a  foreigner  from  Norway,  whose  father  Naoise  had 
slain,  offered  to  behead  them.  Each  of  the  brothers 
begged  to  die  first,  that  he  might  not  witness  the 
deaths  of  the  others.  But  Naoise  ended  this  noble 
rivalry  by  lending  their  executioner  the  sword 
called    '*The    Retaliator",    which   had    been  given 


DEIRDRE'S    LAMENT 

From  the  Drawing  by  J.  H.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 


Some  Gaelic  Love-Stories  199 

him  by  Mananndn  son  of  Ler.  They  knelt  down 
side  by  side,  and  one  blow  of  the  sword  of  the  god 
shore  off  all  their  heads. 

As  for  Deirdre,  there  are  varying  stories  of  her 
death,  but  most  of  them  agree  that  she  did  not 
survive  the  sons  of  Usnach  many  hours.  But, 
before  she  died,  she  made  an  elegy  over  them. 
That  it  is  of  a  singular  pathos  and  beauty  the  few 
verses  which  there  is  space  to  give  will  show.^ 

"  Long  the  day  without  Usnach's  children ! 
It  was  not  mournful  to  be  in  their  company! 
Sons  of  a  king  by  whom  sojourners  were  entertained, 
Three  lions  from  the  Hill  of  the  Cave. 


"  Three  darlings  of  the  women  of  Britain, 
Three  hawks  of  Slieve  Gullion, 
Sons  of  a  king  whom  valour  served. 
To  whom  soldiers  used  to  give  homage! 


"  That  I  should  remain  after  Naoise 
Let  no  one  in  the  world  suppose: 
After  Ardan  and  Ainle 
My  time  would  not  be  long. 

"  Ulster's  over-king,  my  first  husband, 
I  forsook  for  Naoise's  love. 
Short  my  life  after  them : 
I  will  perform  their  funeral  game. 

"  After  them  I  shall  not  be  alive — 
Three  that  would  go  into  every  conflict. 


1  It  will  be  found  in  full  in  Miss  Hull's  Cuchullin  Saga.     The  version  there 
given  was  first  translated  into  French  by  M.  Ponsinet  from  the  Book  of  I.einster. 


200         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Three  who  liked  to  endure  hardships, 
Three  heroes  who  refused  not  combats. 


"  O  man,  that  diggest  the  tomb 
And  puttest  my  darling  from  me, 
Make  not  the  grave  too  narrow: 
I  shall  be  beside  the  noble  ones." 

It  was  a  poor  triumph  for  Conchobar.  Deirdre  in 
all  her  beauty  had  escaped  him  by  death.  His  own 
chief  followers  never  forgave  it.  Fergus,  when  he 
returned  from  Borrach  s  feast,  and  found  out  what 
had  been  done,  gathered  his  own  people,  slew  Con- 
chobar's  son  and  many  of  his  warriors,  and  fled  to 
Ulster's  bitterest  enemies,  Ailill  and  Medb  of  Con- 
naught.  And  Cathbad  the  Druid  cursed  both  king 
and  kingdom,  praying  that  none  of  Conchobars 
race  might  ever  reign  in  Emain  Macha  again. 

So  it  came  to  pass.  The  capital  of  Ulster  was 
only  kept  from  ruin  by  Cuchulainn's  prowess.  When 
he  perished,  it  also  fell,  and  soon  became  what  it  is 
now — a  grassy  hill. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

FINN    AND    THE    FENIANS^ 

The  epoch  of  Emain  Macha  is  followed  in  the 
annals  of  ancient  Ireland  by  a  succession  of  mon- 
archs  who,  though  doubtless  as  mythical  as  King 
Conchobar  and  his  court,  seem  to  grow  gradually 
more  human.  Their  line  lasts  for  about  two  cen- 
turies, culminating  in  a  dynasty  with  which  legend 
has  occupied  itself  more  than  with  its  immediate  pre- 
decessors. This  is  the  one  which  began,  according 
to  the  annalists,  in  a.d.  177,  with  the  famous  Conn 
''the  Hundred- Fighter",  and,  passing  down  to  the 
reign  of  his  even  more  famous  grandson,  Cormac 
**  the  Magnificent",  is  connected  with  the  third  Gaelic 
cycle — that  which  relates  the  exploits  of  Finn  and 
the  Fenians.  All  these  kings  had  their  dealings  with 
the  national  gods.  A  story  contained  in  a  fifteenth- 
century  Irish  manuscript,  and  called  *'The  Champion's 
Prophecy",^  tells  how  Lugh  appeared  to  Conn,  en- 
veloped him  in  a  magic  mist,  led  him  away  to  an 
enchanted  palace,  and  there  prophesied  to  him  the 
number  of  his  descendants,  the  length  of  their  reigns, 

1  The  translations  of  Fenian  stories  are  numerous.  The  reader  will  find  many  of 
them  popularly  retold  in  Lady  Gregory's  Gods  and  Fighting  Men.  Thence  he  may 
pass  on  to  Mr.  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady's  Silva  Gadelica ;  the  Waifs  and  Strays 
of  Celtic  Tradition,  especially  Vol.  IV;  Mr.  J.  G.  Campbell's  The  Fians;  as  well 
as  the  volumes  of  the  Revue  Celtique  and  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society. 

^  See  O'Curry's  translation  in  Appendix  cxxviii  to  his  MS.  Materials. 

201 


202         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

and  the  manner  of  their  deaths.  Another  tradition 
relates  how  Conn's  son,  Connla,  was  wooed  by  a 
goddess  and  borne  away,  Hke  the  British  Arthur, 
in  a  boat  of  glass  to  the  Earthly  Paradise  beyond 
the  sea.^  Yet  another  relates  Conn's  own  marriage 
with  Becuma  of  the  Fair  Skin,  wife  of  that  same 
Labraid  of  the  Quick  Hand  on  Sword  who,  in  an- 
other legend,  married  Liban,  the  sister  of  Fand, 
Cuchulainn's  fairy  love.  Becuma  had  been  dis- 
covered in  an  intrigue  with  Gaiar,  a  son  of  Man- 
annan,  and,  banished  from  the  ''  Land  of  Promise", 
crossed  the  sea  that  sunders  mortals  and  immortals 
to  offer  her  hand  to  Conn.  The  Irish  king  wedded 
her,  but  evil  came  of  the  marriage.  She  grew 
jealous  of  Conn's  other  son.  Art,  and  insisted  upon 
his  banishment;  but  they  agreed  to  play  chess  to 
decide  which  should  go,  and  Art  won.  Art,  called 
'*the  Lonely"  because  he  had  lost  his  brother 
Connla,  was  king  after  Conn,  but  he  is  chiefly 
known  to  legend  as  the  father  of  Cormac. 

Many  Irish  stories  occupy  themselves  with  the 
fame  of  Cormac,  who  is  pictured  as  a  great  legislator 
— a  Gaelic  Solomon.  Certain  traditions  credit  him 
with  having  been  the  first  to  believe  in  a  purer 
doctrine  than  the  Celtic  polytheism,  and  even  with 
having  attempted  to  put  down  druidism,  in  revenge 
for  which  a  druid  called  Maelcen  sent  an  evil  spirit 
who  placed  a  salmon-bone  crossways  in  the  king's 
throat,  as  he  sat  at  meat,  and  so  compassed  his 
death.    Another  class  of  stories,  however,  make  him 

1  The  story,  found  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  appears  in  French  in  De  Jubain- 
ville's  Epopie  Celtique. 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  203 

an  especial  favourite  with  those  same  heathen  deities. 
Mananndn  son  of  Ler,  was  so  anxious  for  his  friend- 
ship that  he  decoyed  him  into  fairyland,  and  gave 
him  a  magic  branch.  It  was  of  silver,  and  bore 
golden  apples,  and,  when  it  was  shaken,  it  made 
such  sweet  music  that  the  wounded,  the  sick,  and 
the  sorrowful  forgot  their  pains,  and  were  lulled  into 
deep  sleep.  Cormac  kept  this  treasure  all  his  life; 
but,  at  his  death,  it  returned  into  the  hands  of  the 
gods.^ 

King  Cormac  was  a  contemporary  of  Finn  mac 
CouP,  whom  he  appointed  head  of  the  Fianna^ 
Eirinn,  more  generally  known  as  the  *'  Fenians ". 
Around  Finn  and  his  men  have  gathered  a  cycle 
of  legends  which  were  equally  popular  with  the 
Gaels  of  both  Scotland  and  Ireland.  We  read  of 
their  exploits  in  stories  and  poems  preserved  in  the 
earliest  Irish  manuscripts,  while  among  the  pea- 
santry both  of  Ireland  and  of  the  West  Highlands 
their  names  and  the  stories  connected  with  them  are 
still  current  lore.  Upon  some  of  these  floating  tra- 
ditions, as  preserved  in  folk  ballads,  MacPherson 
founded  his  factitious  Ossian,  and  the  collection 
of  them  from  the  lips  of  living  men  still  affords 
plenty  of  employment  to  Gaelic  students. 

How  far  Finn  and  his  followers  may  have  been 
historical  personages  it  is  impossible  to  say.  The 
Irish  people  themselves  have  always  held  that  the 
Fenians  were  a  kind  of  native  militia,  and  that  Finn 

*  This  famous  story  is  told  in  several  MSS.  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  cen- 
turies. For  translations  see  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  Irische  Texte,  and  Standish  Hayes 
O'Grady,  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society,  Vol.  HI. 

^  In  Gaelic  spelling,  Fionn  mac  Cumhail.  ^  Pronounced  Fena. 


20^         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

was  their  general.  The  early  historical  writers  of 
Ireland  supported  this  view.  The  chronicler  Tigher- 
nach,  who  died  in  1088,  believed  in  him,  and  the 
"Annals  of  the  Four  Masters",  compiled  between 
the  years  1632  and  1636  from  older  chronicles,  while 
they  ignore  King  Conchobar  and  his  Red  Branch 
Champions  as  unworthy  of  the  serious  consideration 
of  historians,  treat  Finn  as  a  real  person  whose  death 
took  place  in  283  a.d.  Even  so  great  a  modern 
scholar  as  Eugene  O'Curry  declared  in  the  clearest 
language  that  Finn,  so  far  from  being  "a  merely 
imaginary  or  mythical  character",  was  **an  un- 
doubtedly historical  personage;  and  that  he  existed 
about  the  time  at  which  his  appearance  is  recorded 
in  the  Annals  is  as  certain  as  that  Julius  Caesar 
lived  and  ruled  at  the  time  stated  on  the  authority 
of  the  Roman  historians".^ 

The  opinion  of  more  recent  Celtic  scholars,  how- 
ever, is  opposed  to  this  view.  Finn's  pedigree,  pre- 
served in  the  Book  of  Leinster,  may  seem  at  first  to 
give  some  support  to  the  theory  of  his  real  existence, 
but,  on  more  careful  examination  of  it,  his  own  name 
and  that  of  his  father  equally  bewray  him.  Finn 
or  Fionn,  meaning  ''  fair",  is  the  name  of  one  of  the 
mythical  ancestors  of  the  Gaels,  while  his  father's 
name,  Cumhal^,  signifies  the  *'sky",  and  is  the  same 
word  as  Camulus,  the  Gaulish  heaven-god  identified 
by  the  Romans  with  Mars.  His  followers  are  as 
doubtfully  human  as  himself.  One  may  compare 
them  with  Cuchulainn  and  the  rest  of  the  heroes  of 
Emain  Macha.    Their  deeds  are  not  less  marvellous. 

*  O'Curry  :  MS.  Materials,  Lecture  XIV,  p.  303.     ^  Pronounced  Coul  or  Cooal. 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  205 

Like  the  Ultonian  warriors,  they  move,  too,  on  equal 
terms  with  the  gods.  ''The  Fianna  of  Erin",  says 
a  tract  called  "The  Dialogue  of  the  Elders'V  con- 
tained in  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  century  manu- 
scripts, **  had  not  more  frequent  and  free  intercourse 
with  the  men  of  settled  habitation  than  with  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann".^  Angus,  Mider,  Ler,  Man- 
anndn,  and  Bodb  the  Red,  with  their  countless  sons 
and  daughters,  loom  as  large  in  the  Fenian,  or  so- 
called  *'Ossianic"  stories  as  do  the  Fenians  them- 
selves. They  fight  for  them,  or  against  them;  they 
marry  them,  and  are  given  to  them  in  marriage. 

A  luminous  suggestion  of  Professor  Rhys  also 
hints  that  the  Fenians  inherited  the  conduct  of  that 
ancient  war  formerly  waged  between  the  Tuatha 
D6  Danann  and  the  Fomors.  The  most  common 
antagonists  of  Finn  and  his  heroes  are  tribes  of 
invaders  from  oversea,  called  in  the  stories  the 
Lochlannach.  These  ''  Men  of  Lochlann"  are  usually 
identified,  by  those  who  look  for  history  in  the  stories 
of  the  Fenian  cycle,  with  the  invading  bands  of 
Norsemen  who  harried  the  Irish  coasts  in  the  ninth 
century.  But  the  nucleus  of  the  Fenian  tales  ante- 
dates these  Scandinavian  raids,  and  mortal  foes  have 
probably  merely  stepped  into  the  place  of  those  im- 
mortal enemies  of  the  gods  whose  **  Lochlann"  was 
a  country,  not  over  the  sea — but  under  it.^ 

The  earlier  historians  of  Ireland  were  as  ready 
with  their  dates  and  facts  regarding  the  Fenian  band 

1  Agalamh  na  Sendrach.  Under  the  title  The  Colloquy  of  the  Ancients,  there  is 
an  excellent  translation  of  it,  from  the  Book  of  Lismore,  in  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady's 
Silva  Gadelica.  ^  O'Grady :  Silva  Gadelica.  ^  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  355. 


2o6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

as  an  institution  as  with  the  personality  of  Finn. 
It  was  said  to  have  been  first  organized  by  a  king 
called  Fiachadh,  in  300  B.C.,  and  abolished,  or  rather, 
exterminated,  by  Cairbre,  the  son  of  Cormac  mac 
Art,  in  284  a.d.  We  are  told  that  it  consisted  of 
three  regiments  modelled  on  the  Roman  legion; 
each  of  these  bodies  contained,  on  a  peace  footing, 
three  thousand  men,  but  in  time  of  war  could  be 
indefinitely  strengthened.  Its  object  was  to  defend 
the  coasts  of  Ireland  and  the  country  generally, 
throwing  its  weight  upon  the  side  of  any  prince 
who  happend  to  be  assailed  by  foreign  foes.  During 
the  six  months  of  winter,  its  members  were  quar- 
tered upon  the  population,  but  during  the  summer 
they  had  to  forage  for  themselves,  which  they  did 
by  hunting  and  fishing.  Thus  they  lived  in  the 
woods  and  on  the  open  moors,  hardening  themselves 
for  battle  by  their  adventurous  life.  The  sites  of 
their  enormous  camp-fires  were  long  pointed  out 
under  the  name  of  the  *'  Fenians'  cooking-places". 
It  was  not  easy  to  become  a  member  of  this  famous 
band.  A  candidate  had  to  be  not  only  an  expert 
warrior,  but  a  poet  and  a  man  of  culture  as  well. 
He  had  practically  to  renounce  his  tribe;  at  any 
rate  he  made  oath  that  he  would  neither  avenge 
any  of  his  relatives  nor  be  avenged  by  them.  He 
put  himself  under  bonds  never  to  refuse  hospitality 
to  anyone  who  asked,  never  to  turn  his  back  in 
battle,  never  to  insult  any  woman,  and  not  to  accept 
a  dowry  with  his  wife.  In  addition  to  all  this,  he 
had  to  pass  successfully  through  the  most  stringent 
physical  tests.      Indeed,  as  these  have  come  down 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  207 

to  us,  magnified  by  the  perfervid  Celtic  imagination, 
they  are  of  an  altogether  marvellous  and  impossible 
character.  An  aspirant  to  the  Fianna  Eirinn,  we 
are  told,  had  first  to  stand  up  to  his  knees  in  a  pit 
dug  for  him,  his  only  arms  being  his  shield  and  a 
hazel  wand,  while  nine  warriors,  each  with  a  spear, 
standing  within  the  distance  of  nine  ridges  of  land, 
all  hurled  their  weapons  at  him  at  once;  if  he  failed 
to  ward  them  all  off,  he  was  rejected.  Should  he 
succeed  in  this  first  test,  he  was  given  the  distance 
of  one  tree-lengths  start,  and  chased  through  a 
forest  by  armed  men;  if  any  of  them  came  up  to 
him  and  wounded  him,  he  could  not  belong  to  the 
Fenians.  If  he  escaped  unhurt,  but  had  unloosed 
a  single  lock  of  his  braided  hair,  or  had  broken  a 
single  branch  in  his  flight,  or  if,  at  the  end  of  the 
run,  his  weapons  trembled  in  his  hands,  he  was 
refused.  As,  besides  these  tests,  he  was  obliged  to 
jump  over  a  branch  as  high  as  his  forehead,  and 
stoop  under  one  as  low  as  his  knee,  while  running 
at  full  speed,  and  to  pluck  a  thorn  out  of  his  heel 
without  hindrance  to  his  flight,  it  is  clear  that  even 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  Fenians  must  have  been 
quite  exceptional  athletes. ^  * 

But  it  is  time  to  pass  on  to  a  more  detailed  de- 
scription of  these  champions.^  They  are  a  goodly 
company,  not  less  heroic  than  the  mighty  men  of 
Ulster.  First  comes  Finn  himself,  not  the  strongest 
in  body  of  the  Fenians,  but  the  truest,  wisest,  and 
kindest,   gentle   to  women,   generous  to  men,   and 

*  See   The  Enutneralion  of  Finns  Household,  translated  by  O'Grady  in  Silva 
Gadelica.  2  por  a  good  account,  see  J.  G.  Campbell's  The  Fians,  pp.  10-80. 


2o8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

trusted  by  all.  If  he  could  help  it,  he  would  never 
let  anyone  be  in  trouble  or  poverty.  *'  If  the  dead 
leaves  of  the  forest  had  been  gold,  and  the  white 
foam  of  the  water  silver,  Finn  would  have  given  it 
all  away." 

Finn  had  two  sons,  Fergus  and  his  more  famous 
brother  Ossian\  Fergus  of  the  sweet  speech  was 
the  Fenian's  bard,  and,  also,  because  of  his  honeyed 
words,  their  diplomatist  and  ambassador.  Yet,  by 
the  irony  of  fate,  it  is  to  Ossian,  who  is  not  men- 
tioned as  a  poet  in  the  earliest  texts,  that  the  poems 
concerning  the  Fenians  which  are  current  in  Scot- 
land under  the  name  of  ''Ossianic  Ballads"  are 
attributed.  Ossian's  mother  was  Sadb,  a  daughter 
of  Bodb  the  Red.  A  rival  goddess  changed  her  into 
a  deer — which  explains  how  Ossian  got  his  name, 
which  means  ''fawn".  With  such  advantages  of 
birth,  naturally  he  was  speedy  enough  to  run  down 
a  red  deer  hind  and  catch  her  by  the  ear,  though 
far  less  swift-footed  than  his  cousin  Caoilte^  the 
"  Thin  Man".  Neither  was  he  so  strong  as  his  own 
son  Oscar,  the  mightiest  of  all  the  Fenians,  yet,  in 
his  youth,  so  clumsy  that  the  rest  of  the  band  refused 
to  take  him  with  them  on  their  warlike  expeditions. 
They  changed  their  minds,  however,  when,  one  day, 
he  followed  them  unawares,  found  them  giving  way 
before  an  enemy,  and,  rushing  to  their  help,  armed 
only  with  a  great  log  of  wood  which  lay  handy  on 
the  ground,  turned  the  fortunes  of  the  fight.  After 
this,   Oscar  was  hailed  the  best  warrior  of  all  the 

1  In  more  correct  spelling,  Oisin,  and  pronounced  Usheen  or  Isheen. 
*  Pronounced  Kylta  or  Cweeltia 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  209 

Fianna;  he  was  given  command  of  a  battalion, 
and  its  banner,  called  the  **  Terrible  Broom", 
was  regarded  as  the  centre  of  every  battle,  for 
it  was  never  known  to  retreat  a  foot.  Other  pro- 
minent Fenians  were  GolP,  son  of  Morna,  at  first 
Finn  s  enemy  but  afterwards  his  follower,  a  man 
skilled  alike  in  war  and  learning.  Even  though 
he  was  one-eyed,  we  are  told  that  he  was  much 
loved  by  women,  but  not  so  much  as  Finns 
cousin,  Diarmait  O'Duibhne^  whose  fatal  beauty 
ensnared  even  Finn's  betrothed  bride,  Grainne^ 
Their  comic  character  was  Conan,  who  is  repre- 
sented as  an  old,  bald,  vain,  irritable  man,  as  great 
a  braggart  as  ancient  Pistol  and  as  foul-mouthed  as 
Thersites,  and  yet,  after  he  had  once  been  shamed 
into  activity,  a  true  man  of  his  hands.  These  are 
the  prime  Fenian  heroes,  the  chief  actors  in  its 
stories. 

The  Fenian  epic  begins,  before  the  birth  of  its 
hero,  with  the  struggle  of  two  rival  clans,  each  of 
whom  claimed  to  be  the  real  and  only  Fianna 
Eirinn.  They  were  called  the  Clann  Morna,  of 
which  Goll  mac  Morna  was  head,  and  the  Clann 
Baoisgne*,  commanded  by  Finn's  father,  Cumhal. 
A  battle  was  fought  at  Cnucha^,  in  which  Goll 
killed  Cumhal,  and  the  Clann  Baoisgne  was  scat- 
tered. Cumhal's  wife,  however,  bore  a  posthumous 
son,  who  was  brought  up  among  the  Slieve  Bloom 
Mountains  secretly,  for  fear  his  father's  enemies 
should  find  and  kill  him.     The  boy,  who  was  at  first 

1  Pronounced  Gaul.     ^  Pronounced  Dermal  O'Dyna.     ^  Pronounced  Grania. 

*  Pronounced  Basktn.  *  Now  Castleknock,  near  Dublin, 

(B219)  O 


2IO         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

called  Deimne^,  grew  up  to  be  an  expert  hurler, 
swimmer,  runner,  and  hunter.  Later,  like  Cuchu- 
lainn,  and  indeed  many  modern  savages,  he  took  a 
second,  more  personal  name.  Those  who  saw  him 
asked  who  was  the  "fair"  youth.  He  accepted  the 
omen,  and  called  himself  Deimne  Finn. 

At  length,  he  wandered  to  the  banks  of  the  Boyne, 
where  he  found  a  soothsayer  called  Finn  the  Seer 
living  beside  a  deep  pool  near  Slane,  named  '*  Fee's 
Pool",  in  hope  of  catching  one  of  the  ** salmons  of 
knowledge",  and,  by  eating  it,  obtaining  universal 
wisdom.  He  had  been  there  seven  years  without 
result,  though  success  had  been  prophesied  to  one 
named  **  Finn ".  When  the  wandering  son  of 
Cumhal  appeared,  Finn  the  Seer  engaged  him  as 
his  servant.  Shortly  afterwards,  he  caught  the 
coveted  fish,  and  handed  it  over  to  our  Finn  to 
cook,  warning  him  to  eat  no  portion  of  it.  "  Have 
you  eaten  any  of  it?"  he  asked  the  boy,  as  he  brought 
it  up  ready  boiled.  **  No  indeed,"  replied  Finn; 
"  but,  while  I  was  cooking  it,  a  blister  rose  upon  the 
skin,  and,  laying  my  thumb  down  upon  the  blister,  I 
scalded  it,  and  so  I  put  it  into  my  mouth  to  ease  the 
pain."  The  man  was  perplexed.  **  You  told  me 
your  name  was  Deimne,"  he  said;  ''but  have  you 
any  other  name?"  '*Yes,  I  am  also  called  Finn." 
"  It  is  enough,"  replied  his  disappointed  master. 
"  Eat  the  salmon  yourself,  for  you  must  be  the  one 
of  whom  the  prophecy  told."  Finn  ate  the  ''salmon 
of  knowledge  ",  and  thereafter  he  had  only  to  put  his 
thumb  under  his  tooth,  as  he  had  done  when  he 

*  Pronounced  Demna, 


12 


FINN    FINDS    THE    SALMON    OF    KNOWLEDGE 

From  the  Draivinsr  by  H.  R.  Millar 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  211 

scalded  it,  to  receive  fore-knowledge  and  magic 
counsel.^ 

Thus  armed,  Finn  was  more  than  a  match  for  the 
Clann  Morna.  Curious  legends  tell  how  he  dis- 
covered himself  to  his  father  s  old  followers,  con- 
founded his  enemies  with  his  magic,  and  turned 
them  into  faithful  servants.^  Even  Goll  of  the 
Blows  had  to  submit  to  his  sway.  Gradually  he 
welded  the  two  opposing  clans  into  one  Fianna, 
over  which  he  ruled,  taking  tribute  from  the  kings 
of  Ireland,  warring  against  the  Fomorian  "  Loch- 
lannach  ",  destroying  every  kind  of  giant,  serpent, 
or  monster  that  infested  the  land,  and  at  last  carry- 
ing his  mythical  conquests  over  all  Europe. 

Out  of  the  numberless  stories  of  the  Fenian  ex- 
ploits it  is  hard  to  choose  examples.  All  are  heroic, 
romantic,  wild,  fantastic.  In  many  of  them  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann  play  prominent  parts.  One 
such  story  connects  itself  with  an  earlier  mythological 
episode  already  related.  The  reader  will  remember^ 
how,  when  the  Dagda  gave  up  the  kingship  of  the 
immortals,  five  aspirants  appeared  to  claim  it;  how 
of  these  five — Angus,  Mider,  Ler,  Ilbhreach  son 
of  Mannanan,  and  Bodb  the  Red — the  latter  was 
chosen;  how  Ler  refused  to  acknowledge  him,  but 
was  reconciled  later;  how  Mider,  equally  rebellious, 
fled  to  ''desert  country  round  Mount  Leinster**  in 
County  Carlow;  and  how  a  yearly  war  was  waged 
upon  him  and  his  people  by  the  rest  of  the  gods  to 

iThis  and  other  "boy-exploits"  of  Finn  mac  Cumhail  are  contained  in  a  little 
tract  written  upon  a  fragment  of  the  ninth  century  Psalter  of  Cashel.  It  is  trans- 
lated in  Vol.  IV  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society. 

'  Campbell's  Fians,  p.  22.  8 gee  chap.  XI — " The  Gods  in  Exile", 


212         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

bring  them  to  subjection.  This  war  was  still  raging 
in  the  time  of  Finn,  and  Mider  was  not  too  proud  to 
seek  his  help.  One  day  that  Finn  was  hunting  in 
Donegal,  with  Ossian,  Oscar,  Caoilte,  and  Diarmait, 
their  hounds  roused  a  beautiful  fawn,  which,  although 
at  every  moment  apparently  nearly  overtaken,  led 
them  in  full  chase  as  far  as  Mount  Leinster.  Here 
it  suddenly  disappeared  into  a  cleft  in  the  hillside. 
Heavy  snow,  ''making  the  forests  branches  as  it 
were  a  withe-twist ",  now  fell,  forcing  the  Fenians  to 
seek  for  some  shelter,  and  they  therefore  explored 
the  place  into  which  the  fawn  had  vanished.  It  led 
to  a  splendid  sidh  in  the  hollow  of  the  hill.  Enter- 
ing it,  they  were  greeted  by  a  beautiful  goddess- 
maiden,  who  told  them  that  it  was  she,  Mider's 
daughter,  who  had  been  the  fawn,  and  that  she  had 
taken  that  shape  purposely  to  lead  them  there,  in 
the  hope  of  getting  their  help  against  the  army  that 
was  coming  to  attack  the  sidh.  Finn  asked  who  the 
assailants  would  be,  and  was  told  that  they  were 
Bodb  the  Red  with  his  seven  sons,  Angus  **  Son 
of  the  Young"  with  his  seven  sons,  Ler  of  Sfdh 
Fionnechaidh  with  his  twenty -seven  sons,  and 
Fionnbharr  of  Sidh  Meadha  with  his  seventeen 
sons,  as  well  as  numberless  gods  of  lesser  fame 
drawn  from  sidhe  not  only  over  all  Ireland,  but  from 
Scotland  and  the  islands  as  well.  Finn  promised 
his  aid,  and,  with  the  twilight  of  that  same  day,  the 
attacking  forces  appeared,  and  made  their  annual 
assault.  They  were  beaten  off,  after  a  battle  that 
lasted  all  night,  with  the  loss  of  **ten  men,  ten 
score,  and  ten  hundred  ".   Finn,  Oscar,  and  Diarmait, 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  213 

as  well  as  most  of  Mider  s  many  sons,  were  sorely- 
wounded,  but  the  leech  Labhra  healed  all  their 
wounds.^ 

Sooth  to  say,  the  Fenians  did  not  always  require 
the  excuse  of  fairy  alliance  to  start  them  making 
war  on  the  race  of  the  hills.  One  of  the  so-called 
''  Ossianic  ballads "  is  entitled  '*  The  Chase  of  the 
Enchanted  Pigs  of  Angus  of  the  Brugh^".  This 
Angus  is,  of  course,  the  **  Son  of  the  Young",  and 
the  Brugh  that  famous  sidh  beside  the  Boyne  out 
of  which  he  cheated  his  father,  the  Dagda.  After 
the  friendly  manner  of  gods  towards  heroes,  he  in- 
vited Finn  and  a  picked  thousand  of  his  followers 
to  a  banquet  at  the  Brugh.  They  came  to  it  in  their 
finest  clothes,  **  goblets  went  from  hand  to  hand, 
and  waiters  were  kept  in  motion ".  At  last  con- 
versation fell  upon  the  comparative  merits  of  the 
pleasures  of  the  table  and  of  the  chase,  Angus  stoutly 
contending  that  *'  the  gods'  life  of  perpetual  feast- 
ing" was  better  than  all  the  Fenian  huntings,  and 
Finn  as  stoutly  denying  it.  Finn  boasted  of  his 
hounds,  and  Angus  said  that  the  best  of  them  could 
not  kill  one  of  his  pigs.  Finn  angrily  replied  that 
his  two  hounds,  Bran^  and  Sgeolan*,  would  kill  any 
pig  that  trod  on  dry  land.  Angus  answered  that  he 
could  show  Finn  a  pig  that  none  of  his  hounds  or 
huntsmen  could  catch  or  kill.  Here  were  the 
makings  of  a  pretty  quarrel  among  such  inflammable 
creatures  as  gods  and  heroes,  but  the  steward  of 


*  From  the  Colloquy  of  the  Ancients  in  O'Grady's  Silva  Gadelica. 

2  It  is  translated  in  Vol.  VI  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society. 

2  Pronounced  Bran,  not  Bxdn.  *  Pronounced  Skolaun  or  Scolaing, 


214         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  feast  interposed  and  sent  everyone  to  bed.  The 
next  morning,  Finn  left  the  Brugh,  for  he  did  not 
want  to  fight  all  Angus's  fairies  with  his  handful  of 
a  thousand  men.  A  year  passed  before  he  heard 
more  of  it;  then  came  a  messenger  from  Angus, 
reminding  Finn  of  his  promise  to  pit  his  men  and 
hounds  against  Angus's  pigs.  The  Fenians  seated 
themselves  on  the  tops  of  the  hills,  each  with  his 
favourite  hound  in  leash,  and  they  had  not  been 
there  long  before  there  appeared  on  the  eastern 
plain  a  hundred  and  one  such  pigs  as  no  Fenian  had 
ever  seen  before.  Each  was  as  tall  as  a  deer,  and 
blacker  than  a  smith's  coals,  having  hair  like  a 
thicket  and  bristles  like  ships'  masts.  Yet  such  was 
the  prowess  of  the  Fenians  that  they  killed  them  all, 
though  each  of  the  pigs  slew  ten  men  and  many 
hounds.  Then  Angus  complained  that  the  Fenians 
had  murdered  his  son  and  many  others  of  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann,  who,  indeed,  were  none  other 
than  the  pigs  whose  forms  they  had  taken.  There 
were  mighty  recriminations  on  both  sides,  and,  in  the 
end,  the  enraged  Fenians  prepared  to  attack  the 
Brugh  on  the  Boyne.  Then  only  did  Angus  begin 
to  yield,  and,  by  the  advice  of  Ossian,  Finn  made 
peace  with  him  and  his  fairy  folk. 

Such  are  specimens  of  the  tales  which  go  to 
make  up  the  Fenian  cycle  of  sagas.  Hunting  is  the 
most  prominent  feature  of  them,  for  the  Fenians 
were  essentially  a  race  of  mighty  hunters.  But  the 
creatures  of  their  chase  were  not  always  flesh  and 
blood.  Enchanters  who  wished  the  Fenians  ill 
could  always  lure  them  into  danger  by  taking  the 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  215 

shape  of  boar  or  deer,  and  many  a  story  begins 
with  an  innocent  chase  and  ends  with  a  murderous 
battle.  But  out  of  such  struggles  the  Fenians 
always  emerge  successfully,  as  Ossian  is  represented 
proudly  boasting,  "through  truthfulness  and  the 
might  of  their  hands  ". 

The  most  famous  chase  of  all  is,  however,  not 
that  of  deer  or  boar,  but  of  a  woman  and  a  man, 
Finn's  betrothed  wife  and  his  nephew  Diarmait.^ 
Ever  fortunate  in  war,  the  Fenian  leader  found 
disaster  in  his  love.  Wishing  for  a  wife  in  his  old 
age,  he  sent  to  seek  Grainne,  the  daughter  of 
Cormac,  the  High-King  of  Ireland.  Both  King 
Cormac  and  his  daughter  consented,  and  Finn's 
ambassadors  returned  with  an  invitation  to  the 
suitor  to  come  in  a  fortnight's  time  to  claim  his 
bride.  He  arrived  with  his  picked  band,  and  was 
received  in  state  in  the  great  banqueting -hall  of 
Tara.  There  they  feasted,  and  there  Grainne,  the 
king's  daughter,  casting  her  eyes  over  the  assembled 
Fenian  heroes,  saw  Diarmait  O'Duibhne. 

This  Fenian  Adonis  had  a  beauty-spot  upon  his 
cheek  which  no  woman  could  see  without  falling 
instantly  in  love  with  him.  Grainne,  for  all  her 
royal  birth,  was  no  exception  to  this  rule.  She 
asked  a  druid  to  point  her  out  the  principal  guests. 
The  druid  told  her  all  their  names  and  exploits. 
Then  she  called  for  a  jewelled  drinking-horn,  and, 
filling  it  with  a  drugged  wine,  sent  it  round  to  each 
in  turn,   except  to   Diarmait.      None  could  be  so 

*  A  fine  translation  of  the  Pursuit  of  Diarmait  and  Grainne  has  been  published 
by  S.  H.  O' Grady  in  Vol.  HI  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society 


2i6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

discourteous  as  to  refuse  wine  from  the  hand  of  a 
princess.     All  drank,  and  fell  into  deep  sleep. 

Then,  rising,  she  came  to  Diarmait,  told  him  her 
passion  for  him,  and  asked  for  its  return.  **  I  will 
not  love  the  betrothed  of  my  chief,"  he  replied, 
**and,  even  if  I  wished,  I  dare  not."  And  he 
praised  Finn's  virtues,  and  decried  his  own  fame. 
But  Grainne  merely  answered  that  she  put  him 
under  geasa  (bonds  which  no  hero  could  refuse  to 
redeem)  to  flee  with  her;  and  at  once  went  back  to 
her  chair  before  the  rest  of  the  company  awoke 
from  their  slumber. 

After  the  feast,  Diarmait  went  round  to  his  com- 
rades, one  by  one,  and  told  them  of  Grainne's  love 
for  him,  and  of  the  geasa  she  had  placed  upon  him 
to  take  her  from  Tara.  He  asked  each  of  them 
what  he  ought  to  do.  All  answered  that  no  hero 
could  break  a  geis  put  upon  him  by  a  woman.  He 
even  asked  Finn,  concealing  Grainne's  name,  and 
Finn  gave  him  the  same  counsel  as  the  others. 
That  night,  the  lovers  fled  from  Tara  to  the  ford  of 
the  Shannon  at  Athlone,  crossed  it,  and  came  to 
a  place  called  the  "Wood  of  the  Two  Tents", 
where  Diarmait  wove  a  hut  of  branches  for  Grainne 
to  shelter  in. 

Meanwhile  Finn  had  discovered  their  flight,  and 
his  rage  knew  no  bounds.  He  sent  his  trackers, 
the  Clann  Neamhuain\  to  follow  them.  They 
tracked  them  to  the  wood,  and  one  of  them  climbed 
a  tree,  and,  looking  down,  saw  the  hut,  with  a  strong 
seven -doored  fence  built  round  it,  and  Diarmait  and 

1  Pronounced  Navin  or  Nowin, 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  217 

Grainne  inside.  When  the  news  came  to  the 
Fenians,  they  were  sorry,  for  their  sympathies  were 
with  Diarmait  and  not  with  Finn.  They  tried  to 
warn  him,  but  he  took  no  heed;  for  he  had  deter- 
mined to  fight  and  not  to  flee.  Indeed,  when  Finn 
himself  came  to  the  fence,  and  called  over  it  to 
Diarmait,  asking  if  he  and  Grainne  were  within,  he 
replied  that  they  were,  but  that  none  should  enter 
unless  he  gave  permission. 

So  Diarmait,  like  Cuchulainn  in  the  war  of  Ulster 
against  Ireland,  found  himself  matched  single- 
handed  against  a  host.  But,  also  like  Cuchulainn, 
he  had  a  divine  helper.  The  favourite  of  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann,  he  had  been  the  pupil  of 
Mananndn  son  of  L^r  in  the  "  Land  of  Promise  '*, 
and  had  been  fostered  by  Angus  of  the  Brugh. 
Mananndn  had  given  him  his  two  spears,  the 
"Red  Javelin"  and  the  ''Yellow  Javelin",  and  his 
two  swords,  the  "  Great  Fury "  and  the  **  Little 
Fury ".  And  now  Angus  came  to  look  for  his 
foster-son,  and  brought  with  him  the  magic  mantle 
of  invisibility  used  by  the  gods.  He  advised  Diar- 
mait and  Grainne  to  come  out  wrapped  in  the 
cloak,  and  thus  rendered  invisible.  Diarmait  still 
refused  to  flee,  but  asked  Angus  to  protect  Grainne. 
Wrapping  the  magic  mantle  round  her,  the  god  led 
the  princess  away  unseen  by  any  of  the  Fenians. 

By  this  time,  Finn  had  posted  men  outside  all  the 
seven  doors  in  the  fence.  Diarmait  went  to  each  of 
them  in  turn.  At  the  first,  were  Ossian  and  Oscar 
with  the  Clann  Baoisgne.  They  offered  him  their 
protection.      At  the  second,  were  Caoilte  and   the 


2i8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Clann  Ronan,  who  said  they  would  fight  to  the 
death  for  him.  At  the  third,  were  Conan  and  the 
Clann  Morna,  also  his  friends.  At  the  fourth,  stood 
Cuan  with  the  Fenians  of  Munster,  Diarmait's  native 
province.  At  the  fifth,  were  the  Ulster  Fenians, 
who  also  promised  him  protection  against  Finn. 
But  at  the  sixth,  were  the  Clann  Neamhuain,  who 
hated  him;  and  at  the  seventh,  was  Finn  himself 

**  It  is  by  your  door  that  I  will  pass  out,  O  Finn," 
cried  Diarmait.  Finn  charged  his  men  to  surround 
Diarmait  as  he  came  out,  and  kill  him.  But  he 
leaped  the  fence,  passing  clean  over  their  heads, 
and  fled  away  so  swiftly  that  they  could  not  follow 
him.  He  never  halted  till  he  reached  the  place  to 
which  he  knew  Angus  had  taken  Grainne.  The 
friendly  god  left  them  with  a  little  sage  advice: 
never  to  hide  in  a  tree  with  only  one  trunk;  never 
to  rest  in  a  cave  with  only  one  entrance;  never  to 
land  on  an  island  with  only  one  channel  of  ap- 
proach; not  to  eat  their  supper  where  they  had 
cooked  it,  nor  to  sleep  where  they  had  supped,  and, 
where  they  had  slept  once,  never  to  sleep  again. 
With  these  Red- Indian-like  tactics,  it  was  some  time 
before  Finn  discovered  them. 

However,  he  found  out  at  last  where  they  were, 
and  sent  champions  with  venomous  hounds  to  take 
or  kill  them.  But  Diarmait  conquered  all  who  were 
sent  against  him. 

Yet  still  Finn  pursued,  until  Diarmait,  as  a  last 
hope  of  escape,  took  refuge  under  a  magic  quicken- 
tree  \  which  bore  scarlet  fruit,  the  ambrosia  of  the 

1  The  mountain-ash,  or  rowan. 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  219 

gods.  It  had  grown  from  a  single  berry  dropped 
by  one  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  who,  when  they 
found  that  they  had  carelessly  endowed  mortals  with 
celestial  and  immortal  food,  had  sent  a  huge,  one- 
eyed  Fomor  called  Sharvan  the  Surly  to  guard  it, 
so  that  no  man  might  eat  of  its  fruit.  All  day,  this 
Fomor  sat  at  the  foot  of  the  tree,  and,  all  night,  he 
slept  among  its  branches,  and  so  terrible  was  his 
appearance  that  neither  the  Fenians  nor  any  other 
people  dared  to  come  within  several  miles  of  him. 

But  Diarmait  was  willing  to  brave  the  Fomor  in 
the  hope  of  getting  a  safe  hiding-place  for  Grainne. 
He  came  boldly  up  to  him,  and  asked  leave  to  camp 
and  hunt  in  his  neighbourhood.  The  Fomor  told 
him  surlily  that  he  might  camp  and  hunt  where  he 
pleased,  so  long  as  he  refrained  from  taking  any  of 
the  scarlet  berries.  So  Diarmait  built  a  hut  near 
a  spring;  and  he  and  Grainne  lived  there,  killing 
the  wild  animals  for  food. 

But,  unhappily,  Grainne  conceived  so  strong  a 
desire  to  eat  the  quicken  berries  that  she  felt  that 
she  must  die  unless  her  wish  could  be  gratified.  At 
first  she  tried  to  hide  this  longing,  but  in  the  end 
she  was  forced  to  tell  her  companion.  Diarmait 
had  no  desire  to  quarrel  with  the  Fomor;  so  he 
went  to  him  and  told  the  plight  that  Grainne  was 
in,  and  asked  for  a  handful  of  the  berries  as  a 
gift. 

But  the  Fomor  merely  answered:  "I  swear  to 
you  that  if  nothing  would  save  the  princess  and  her 
unborn  child  except  my  berries,  and  if  she  were  the 
last  woman  upon  the  earth,  she  should  not  have  any 


220         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

of  them."     Whereupon  Diarmait  fought  the  Fomor, 
and,  after  much  trouble,  killed  him. 

It  was  reported  to  Finn  that  the  guardian  of  the 
magic  quicken-tree  lived  no  longer,  and  he  guessed 
that  Diarmait  must  have  killed  him;  so  he  came 
down  to  the  place  with  seven  battalions  of  the 
Fenians  to  look  for  him.  By  this  time,  Diarmait 
had  abandoned  his  own  hut  and  taken  possession  of 
that  built  by  the  Fomor  among  the  branches  of  the 
magic  quicken.  He  was  sitting  in  it  with  Grainne 
when  Finn  and  his  men  came  and  camped  at  the 
foot  of  the  tree,  to  wait  till  the  heat  of  noon  had 
passed  before  beginning  their  search. 

To  beguile  the  time,  Finn  called  for  his  chess- 
board and  challenged  his  son  Ossian  to  a  game. 
They  played  until  Ossian  had  only  one  more 
move. 

''  One  move  would  make  you  a  winner,"  said 
Finn  to  him,  ''  but  I  challenge  you  and  all  the 
Fenians  to  guess  it" 

Only  Diarmait,  who  had  been  looking  down 
through  the  branches  upon  the  players,  knew  the 
move.  He  could  not  resist  dropping  a  berry  on  to 
the  board,  so  deftly  that  it  hit  the  very  chess-man 
which  Ossian  ought  to  move  in  order  to  win. 
Ossian  took  the  hint,  moved  it,  and  won.  A  second 
and  a  third  game  were  played;  and  in  each  case  the 
same  thing  happened.  Then  Finn  felt  sure  that 
the  berries  that  had  prompted  Ossian  must  have 
been  thrown  by  Diarmait. 

He  called  out,  asking  Diarmait  if  he  were  there, 
and  the  Fenian  hero,  who  never  spoke  an  untruth, 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  221 

answered  that  he  was.  So  the  quicken-tree  was 
surrounded  by  armed  men,  just  as  the  fenced  hut  in 
the  woods  had  been.  But,  again,  things  happened  in 
the  same  way;  for  Angus  of  the  Brugh  took  away 
Grainne  wrapped  in  the  invisible  magic  cloak,  while 
Diarmait,  walking  to  the  end  of  a  thick  branch, 
cleared  the  circle  of  Fenians  at  a  bound,  and 
escaped   untouched. 

This  was  the  end  of  the  famous  "Pursuit";  for 
Angus  came  as  ambassador  to  Finn,  urging  him 
to  become  reconciled  to  the  fugitives,  and  all  the 
best  of  the  Fenians  begged  Finn  to  consent.  So 
Diarmait  and  Grainne  were  allowed  to  return  in 
peace. 

But  Finn  never  really  forgave,  and,  soon  after,  he 
urged  Diarmait  to  go  out  to  the  chase  of  the  wild 
boar  of  Benn  Gulban^  Diarmait  killed  the  boar 
without  getting  any  hurt;  for,  like  the  Greek 
Achilles,  he  was  invulnerable,  save  in  his  heel  alone. 
Finn,  who  knew  this,  told  him  to  measure  out  the 
length  of  the  skin  with  his  bare  feet.  Diarmait  did 
so.  Then  Finn,  declaring  that  he  had  measured  it 
wrongly,  ordered  him  to  tread  it  again  in  the  op- 
posite direction.  This  was  against  the  lie  of  the 
bristles;  and  one  of  them  pierced  Diarmait's  heel, 
and  inflicted  a  poisoned  and  mortal  wound. 

This  '*  Pursuit  of  Diarmait  and  Grainne ",  which 
has  been  told  at  such  length,  marks  in  some  degree 
the  climax  of  the  Fenian  power,  after  which  it  began 
to  decline  towards  its  end.  The  friends  of  Diarmait 
never  forgave  the  treachery  with  which  Finn  had 

^  Now  called  Benbulben.     It  is  near  Sligo. 


222         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

compassed  his  death.  The  ever-slumbering  rivalry 
between  Goll  and  his  Clann  Morna  and  Finn  and 
his  Clann  Baoisgne  began  to  show  itself  as  open 
enmity.  Quarrels  arose,  too,  between  the  Fenians 
and  the  High- Kings  of  Ireland,  which  culminated 
at  last  in  the  annihilation  of  the  Fianna  at  the  battle 
of  Gabhra  ^. 

This  is  said  to  have  been  fought  in  a.d.  284. 
Finn  himself  had  perished  a  year  before  it,  in  a 
skirmish  with  rebellious  Fenians  at  the  Ford  of 
Brea  on  the  Boyne.  King  Cormac  the  Magnificent, 
Grainne's  father,  was  also  dead.  It  was  between 
Finn's  grandson  Oscar  and  Cormac's  son  Cairbr6 
that  war  broke  out.  This  mythical  battle  was  as 
fiercely  waged  as  that  of  Arthurs  last  fight  at 
Camlan.  Oscar  slew  Cairbr6,  and  was  slain  by  him. 
Almost  all  the  Fenians  fell,  as  well  as  all  Cairbr6  s 
forces. 

Only  two  of  the  greater  Fenian  figures  survived. 
One  was  Caoilte,  whose  swiftness  of  foot  saved 
him  at  the  end  when  all  was  lost.  The  famous 
story,  called  the  **  Dialogue  of  the  Elders",  represents 
him  discoursing  to  St.  Patrick,  centuries  after,  of 
the  Fenians'  wonderful  deeds.  Having  lost  his 
friends  of  the  heroic  age,  he  is  said  to  have  cast 
in  his  lot  with  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann.  He  fought 
in  a  battle,  with  Ilbhreach  son  of  Mananndn,  against 
L^r  himself,  and  killed  the  ancient  sea-god  with  his 
own  hand.^  The  tale  represents  him  taking  posses- 
sion of  Ler's  fairy  palace  of  Sidh  Fionnechaidh, 
after  which  we  know  no  more  of  him,  except  that 

1  Pronounced  Gavra,  '  See  O' Grady's  Silva  Gadeliccu 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  223 

he  has  taken  rank  in  the  minds  of  the  Irish  pea- 
santry as  one  of,  and  a  ruler  among,  the  Sidhe. 

The  other  was  Ossian,  who  did  not  fight  at 
Gabhra,  for,  long  before,  he  had  taken  the  great 
journey  which  most  heroes  of  mythology  take,  to 
that  bourne  from  which  no  ordinary  mortal  ever 
returns.  Like  Cuchulainn,  it  was  upon  the  invita- 
tion of  a  goddess  that  he  went.  The  Fenians  were 
hunting  near  Lake  Killarney  when  a  lady  of  more 
than  human  beauty  came  to  them,  and  told  them 
that  her  name  was  Niamh\  daughter  of  the  Son 
of  the  Sea.  The  Gaelic  poet,  Michael  Comyn,  who, 
in  the  eighteenth  century,  rewove  the  ancient  story 
into  his  own  words,^  describes  her  in  just  the  same 
way  as  one  of  the  old  bards  would  have  done : 

"  A  royal  crown  was  on  her  head ; 
And  a  brown  mantle  of  precious  silk, 
Spangled  with  stars  of  red  gold. 
Covering  her  shoes  down  to  the  grass. 

"  A  gold  ring  was  hanging  down 
From  each  yellow  curl  of  her  golden  hair; 
Her  eyes,  blue,  clear,  and  cloudless, 
Like  a  dew-drop  on  the  top  of  the  grass. 

"  Redder  were  her  cheeks  than  the  rose, 
Fairer  was  her  visage  than  the  swan  upon  the  wave. 
And  more  sweet  was  the  taste  of  her  balsam  lips 
Than  honey  mingled  thro'  red  wine. 

1  Pronounced  Nee-av. 

2  The  Lay  of  Oisin  in  the  Land  of  Youth,  translated  by  Brian  O'Looney  for 
the  Ossianic  'Siocx^x.y— Transactions,  Vol.  IV.  A  fine  modern  poem  on  the  same 
subject  is  W.  B.  Yeats'  Wanderings  of  Oisin. 


224         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

•*  A  garment,  wide,  long,  and  smooth 
Covered  the  white  steed, 
There  was  a  comely  saddle  of  red  gold, 
And  her  right  hand  held  a  bridle  with  a  golden  bit. 

"  Four  shoes  well-shaped  were  under  him, 
Of  the  yellow  gold  of  the  purest  quality; 
A  silver  wreath  was  on  the  back  of  his  head, 
And  there  was  not  in  the  world  a  steed  better." 

Such  was  Niamh  of  the  Golden  Hair,  Mananndn  s 
daughter;  and  it  is  small  wonder  that,  when  she 
chose  Ossian  from  among  the  sons  of  men  to  be  her 
lover,  all  Finn's  supplications  could  not  keep  him. 
He  mounted  behind  her  on  her  fairy  horse,  and 
they  rode  across  the  land  to  the  sea-shore,  and  then 
over  the  tops  of  the  waves.  As  they  went,  she 
described  the  country  of  the  gods  to  him  in  just  the 
same  terms  as  Mananndn  himself  had  pictured  it 
to  Bran,  son  of  Febal,  as  Mider  had  painted  it  to 
Etain,  and  as  everyone  that  went  there  limned  it 
to  those  that  stayed  at  home  on  earth. 

**  It  is  the  most  delightful  country  to  be  found 
Of  greatest  repute  under  the  sun ; 
Trees  drooping  with  fruit  and  blossom. 
And  foliage  growing  on  the  tops  of  boughs. 

**  Abundant,  there,  are  honey  and  wine. 
And  everything  that  eye  has  beheld. 
There  will  not  come  decline  on  thee  with  lapse  of  time. 
Death  or  decay  thou  wilt  not  see." 

As  they  went  they  saw  wonders.  Fairy  palaces  with 


Finn  and  the  Fenians  225 

bright  sun-bowers  and  lime-white  walls  appeared  on 
the  surface  of  the  sea.  At  one  of  these  they  halted, 
and  Ossian,  at  Niamh's  request,  attacked  a  fierce 
Fomor  who  lived  there,  and  set  free  a  damsel  of 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  whom  he  kept  imprisoned. 
He  saw  a  hornless  fawn  leap  from  wave  to  wave, 
chased  by  one  of  those  strange  hounds  of  Celtic 
myth  which  are  pure  white,  with  red  ears.  At  last 
they  reached  the  *'  Land  of  the  Young",  and  there 
Ossian  dwelt  with  Niamh  for  three  hundred  years 
before  he  remembered  Erin  and  the  Fenians.  Then 
a  great  wish  came  upon  him  to  see  his  own  country 
and  his  own  people  again,  and  Niamh  gave  him 
leave  to  go,  and  mounted  him  upon  a  fairy  steed 
for  the  journey.  One  thing  alone  she  made  him 
swear — not  to  let  his  feet  touch  earthly  soil.  Ossian 
promised,  and  reached  Ireland  on  the  wings  of  the 
wind.  But,  like  the  children  of  L^r  at  the  end  of 
their  penance,  he  found  all  changed.  He  asked 
for  Finn  and  the  Fenians,  and  was  told  that  they 
were  the  names  of  people  who  had  lived  long  ago, 
and  whose  deeds  were  written  of  in  old  books.  The 
Battle  of  Gabhra  had  been  fought,  and  St.  Patrick 
had  come  to  Ireland,  and  made  all  things  new.  The 
very  forms  of  men  had  altered;  they  seemed  dwarfs 
compared  with  the  giants  of  his  day.  Seeing  three 
hundred  of  them  trying  in  vain  to  raise  a  marble 
slab,  he  rode  up  to  them  in  contemptuous  kindness, 
and  lifted  it  with  one  hand.  But,  as  he  did  so,  the 
golden  saddle-girth  broke  with  the  strain,  and  he 
touched  the  earth  with  his  feet.  The  fairy  horse 
vanished,    and    Ossian    rose    from    the   ground,   no 

(  B  819  )  F 


226         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

longer  divinely  young  and  fair  and  strong,   but  a 
blind,  gray-haired,  withered  old  man. 

A  number  of  spirited  ballads^  tell  how  Ossian, 
stranded  in  his  old  age  upon  earthly  soil,  unable  to 
help  himself  or  find  his  own  food,  is  taken  by  St. 
Patrick  into  his  house  to  be  converted.  The  saint 
paints  to  him  in  the  brightest  colours  the  heaven 
which  may  be  his  own  if  he  will  but  repent,  and 
in  the  darkest  the  hell  in  which  he  tells  him  his 
old  comrades  now  lie  in  anguish.  Ossian  replies 
to  the  saint's  arguments,  entreaties,  and  threats  in 
language  which  is  extraordinarily  frank.  He  will 
not  believe  that  heaven  could  be  closed  to  the 
Fenians  if  they  wished  to  enter  it,  or  that  God 
himself  would  not  be  proud  to  claim  friendship 
with  Finn.  And  if  it  be  not  so,  what  is  the  use 
to  him  of  eternal  life  where  there  is  no  hunting, 
or  wooing  fair  women,  or  listening  to  the  songs 
and  tales  of  bards?  No,  he  will  go  to  the  Fenians, 
whether  they  sit  at  the  feast  or  in  the  fire;  and  so 
he  dies  as  he  had  lived. 

1  See  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society.     They  are  generally  called  the 
Dialogues  of  Oisin  and  Patrick. 


CHAPTER   XV 

THE   DECLINE   AND    FALL   OF    THE   GODS 

In  Spite,  however,  of  the  wide- spread  popularity 
of  the  ballads  that  took  the  form  of  dialogues  be- 
tween Ossian  and  Patrick,  certain  traditions  say 
that  the  saint  succeeded  in  converting  the  hero. 
Caoilt6,  the  other  great  surviving  Fenian,  was  also 
represented  as  having  gladly  exchanged  his  pagan 
lore  for  the  faith  and  salvation  offered  him.  We 
may  see  the  same  influence  on  foot  in  the  later 
legends  concerning  the  Red  Branch  Champions.  It 
was  the  policy  of  the  first  Christianizers  of  Ireland 
to  describe  the  loved  heroes  of  their  still  half- 
heathen  flocks  as  having  handed  in  their  submission 
to  the  new  creed.  The  tales  about  Conchobar  and 
Cuchulainn  were  amended,  to  prove  that  those  very 
pagan  personages  had  been  miraculously  brought  to 
accept  the  gospel  at  the  last.  An  entirely  new  story 
told  how  the  latter  hero  was  raised  from  the  dead 
by  Saint  Patrick  that  he  might  bear  witness  of  the 
truth  of  Christianity  to  Laogaire  the  Second,  King 
of  Ireland,  which  he  did  with  such  fervour  and 
eloquence  that  the  sceptical  monarch  was  con- 
vinced.^ 

1  The  story,  contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  is  called  The  Phantom 
Chariot.  It  has  been  translated  by  Mr.  O'Beime  Crowe,  and  is  included  in  Miss 
Hull's  Cuchulinn  Saga. 

Vtt 


228         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Daring  attempts  were  also  made  to  change  the 
Tuatha  D6  Danann  from  pagan  gods  into  Christian 
saints,  but  these  were  by  no  means  so  profitable  as 
the  policy  pursued  towards  the  more  human-seeming 
heroes.  With  one  of  them  alone,  was  success  im- 
mediate and  brilliant.  Brigit,  the  goddess  of  fire, 
poetry,  and  the  hearth,  is  famous  to-day  as  Saint 
Bridget,  or  Bride.  Most  popular  of  all  the  Irish 
saints,  she  can  still  be  easily  recognized  as  the 
daughter  of  the  Dagda.  Her  Christian  attributes, 
almost  all  connected  with  fire,  attest  her  pagan 
origin.^  She  was  born  at  sunrise;  a  house  in  which 
she  dwelt  blazed  into  a  flame  which  reached  to 
heaven;  a  pillar  of  fire  rose  from  her  head  when 
she  took  the  veil;  and  her  breath  gave  new  life  to 
the  dead.  As  with  the  British  goddess  Sul,  wor- 
shipped at  Bath,  who — the  first  century  Latin  writer 
Solinus^  tells  us — **  ruled  over  the  boiling  springs, 
and  at  her  altar  there  flamed  a  perpetual  fire  which 
never  whitened  into  ashes,  but  hardened  into  a 
stony  mass ",  the  sacred  flame  on  her  shrine  at 
Kildare  was  never  allowed  to  go  out.  It  was  ex- 
tinguished once,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  but  was 
relighted,  and  burnt  with  undying  glow  until  the 
suppression  of  the  monasteries  by  Henry  the  Eighth. 
This  sacred  fire  might  not  be  breathed  on  by  the 
impure  human  breath.  For  nineteen  nights  it  was 
tended  by  her  nuns,  but  on  the  twentieth  night  it 
was  left  untouched,  and  kept  itself  alight  miracu- 
lously.      With    so  little   of  her   essential   character 

1  See  Elton,  Origins  of  English  History,  pp.  269-271. 
*  Caius  Julius  Solinus,  known  as  Polyhistor,  chap.  xxiv. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       229 

and  ritual  changed,  it  is  small  wonder  that  the 
half-pagan,  half-Christian  Irish  gladly  accepted  the 
new  saint  in  the  stead  of  the  old  goddess. 

Doubtless  a  careful  examination  of  Irish  hagi- 
ology  would  result  in  the  discovery  of  many  other 
saints  whose  names  and  attributes  might  render 
them  suspect  of  previous  careers  as  pagan  gods. 
But  their  acceptation  was  not  sufficiently  general  to 
do  away  with  the  need  of  other  means  of  counter- 
acting the  still  living  influence  of  the  Gaelic  Pan- 
theon. Therefore  a  fresh  school  of  euhemerists 
arose  to  prove  that  the  gods  were  never  even  saints, 
but  merely  worldly  men  who  had  once  lived  and 
ruled  in  Erin.  Learned  monks  worked  hard  to 
construct  a  history  of  Ireland  from  the  Flood  down- 
wards. Mr.  Eugene  O'Curry  has  compiled  from 
the  various  pedigrees  they  elaborated,  and  inserted 
into  the  books  of  Ballymote,  Lecan,  and  Leinster 
an  amazing  genealogy  which  shows  how,  not  merely 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  but  also  the  Fir  Bolgs,  the 
Fomors,  the  Milesians,  and  the  races  of  Partholon 
and  Nemed  were  descended  from  Noah.  Japhet, 
the  patriarch's  son,  was  the  father  of  Magog,  from 
whom  came  two  lines,  the  first  being  the  Milesians, 
while  the  second  branched  out  into  all  the  other 
races.  ^ 

Having  once  worked  the  gods,  first  into  universal 
history,  and  then  into  the  history  of  Ireland,  it  was 
an  easy  matter  to  supply  them  with  dates  of  birth 
and  death,  local  habitations,  and  places  of  burial. 

1  It  is  appended  to  his  translation  of  the  tale  of  the  Exile  of  the  Children  of 
Usnach  in  Atlantis,  Vol.  III. 


230         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

We  are  told  with  precision  exactly  how  long  Nuada, 
the  Dagda,  Lugh,  and  the  others  reigned  at  Tara. 
The  barrows  by  the  Boyne  provided  them  with 
comfortable  tombs.  Their  enemies,  the  Fomors, 
became  real  invaders  who  were  beaten  in  real 
battles.  Thus  it  was  thought  to  make  plain  prose 
of  their  divinities. 

It  is  only  fair,  however,  to  these  early  euhemerists 
to  say  that  they  have  their  modern  disciples.  There 
are  many  writers,  of  recognized  authority  upon  their 
subjects,  who,  in  dealing  with  the  history  of  Ireland 
or  the  composition  of  the  British  race,  claim  to  find 
real  peoples  in  the  tribes  mentioned  in  Gaelic  myth. 
Unfortunately,  the  only  point  they  agree  upon  is 
the  accepted  one — that  the  *' Milesians"  were  Aryan 
Celts.  They  are  divided  upon  the  question  of  the 
**  Fir  Bolgs ",  in  whom  some  see  the  pre-Aryan 
tribes,  while  others,  led  astray  by  the  name,  regard 
them  as  Belgic  Gauls;  and  over  the  really  mytho- 
logical races  they  run  wild.  In  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann  are  variously  found  Gaels,  Picts,  Danes, 
Scandinavians,  Ligurians,  and  Finns,  while  the 
Fomors  rest  under  the  suspicion  of  having  been 
Iberians,  Moors,  Romans,  Finns,  Goths,  or  Teutons. 
As  for  the  people  of  Partholon  and  Nemed,  they 
have  even  been  explained  as  men  of  the  Palaeolithic 
Age.  This  chaos  of  opinion  was  fortunately  avoided 
by  the  native  annalists,  who  had  no  particular  views 
upon  the  question  of  race,  except  that  everybody 
came  from  **  Spain  ". 

Of  course  there  were  dissenters  from  this  pre- 
vailing mania  for  euhemerization.     As  late  as  the 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       231 

tenth  century,  a  poet  called  Eochaid  O'Flynn,  writing 
of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  at  first  seems  to  hesitate 
whether  to  ascribe  humanity  or  divinity  to  them, 
and  at  last  frankly  avows  their  godhead.  In  his 
poem,  preserved  in  the  Book  of  Ballymote,^  he 
says : — 

"  Though  they  came  to  learned  Erinn 
Without  buoyant,  adventurous  ships, 
No  man  in  creation  knew 
Whether  they  were  of  the  earth  or  of  the  sky. 

"  If  they  were  diabolical  demons, 
They  came  from  that  woeful  expulsion  ;^ 
If  they  were  of  a  race  of  tribes  and  nations, 
If  they  were  human,  they  were  of  the  race  of  Beothach." 

Then  he  enumerates  them  in  due  succession,  and 
ends  by  declaring: — 

"  Though  I  have  treated  of  these  deities  in  their  order, 
Yet  I  have  not  adored  them  ". 

One  may  surmise  with  probability  that  the 
common  people  agreed  rather  with  the  poet  than 
with  the  monk.  Pious  men  in  monasteries  might 
write  what  they  liked,  but  mere  laymen  would  not 
be  easily  persuaded  that  their  cherished  gods  had 
never  been  anything  more  than  men  like  them- 
selves. Probably  they  said  little,  but  acted  in 
secret  according  to  their  inherited  ideas.  Let  it 
be  granted,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  that  Goibniu  was 
only  a  man;  none  the  less,  his  name  was  known 
to  be  uncommonly  effective  in  an  incantation.     This 

1  See  Cusack's  History  of  Ireland,  pp.  160-162.  *  I.e.  from  Heaven. 


232         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

applied  equally  to  Diancecht,  and  invocations  to 
both  of  them  are  contained  in  some  verses  which  an 
eighth-century  Irish  monk  wrote  on  the  margin  of 
a  manuscript  still  preserved  at  St.  Gall,  in  Switzer- 
land. Some  prescriptions  of  Diancecht's  have  come 
down  to  us,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  they 
hardly  differ  from  those  current  among  ordinary 
mediaeval  physicians.  Perhaps,  after  that  unfortu- 
nate spilling  of  the  herbs  that  grew  out  of  Miach's 
body,  he  had  to  fall  back  upon  empirical  research. 
He  invented  a  porridge  for  **  the  relief  of  ailments 
of  the  body,  as  cold,  phlegm,  throat  cats,  and  the 
presence  of  living  things  in  the  body,  as  worms"; 
it  was  compounded  of  hazel  buds,  dandelion,  chick- 
weed,  sorrel,  and  oatmeal;  and  was  to  be  taken 
every  morning  and  evening.  He  also  prescribed 
against  the  effects  of  witchcraft  and  the  fourteen 
diseases  of  the  stomach. 

Goibniu,  in  addition  to  his  original  character  as 
the  divine  smith  and  sorcerer,  gained  a  third  repu- 
tation among  the  Irish  as  a  great  builder  and 
bridge- maker.  As  such  he  is  known  as  the  Gobhan 
Saer,  that  is,  Goibniu  the  Architect,  and  marvellous 
tales,  current  all  over  Ireland   attest  his  prowess. 

"  Men  call'd  him  Gobhan  Saer,  and  many  a  tale 
Yet  lingers  in  the  by-ways  of  the  land 

Of  how  he  cleft  the  rock,  or  down  the  vale 
Led  the  bright  river,  child-like,  in  his  hand : 

Of  how  on  giant  ships  he  spread  great  sail. 
And  many  marvels  else  by  him  first  plann'd  ", 

writes  a  poet  of  modern  Ireland.^     Especially  were 

*  Thomas  D'Arcy  M'Gee:  Poems,  p.  78,  "The  Gobhan  Saer". 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       233 

the  **  round  towers "  attributed  to  him,  and  the 
Christian  clerics  appropriated  his  popularity  by  de- 
scribing him  as  having  been  the  designer  of  their 
churches.  He  used,  according  to  legend,  to  wander 
over  the  country,  clad,  like  the  Greek  Hephaestus, 
whom  he  resembles,  in  working  dress,  seeking  com- 
missions and  adventures.  His  works  remain  in  the 
cathedrals  and  churches  of  Ireland;  and,  with  regard 
to  his  adventures,  many  strange  legends  are  still, 
or  were  until  very  recently,  current  upon  the  lips 
of  old  people  in  remote  parts  of  Ireland. 

Some  of  these  are,  as  might  have  been  expected, 
nothing  more  than  half-understood  recollections  of 
the  ancient  mythology.  In  them  appear  as  char- 
acters others  of  the  old,  yet  not  quite  forgotten  gods 
— Lugh,  Mananndn,  and  Balor — names  still  remem- 
bered as  those  of  long-past  druids,  heroes,  and  kings 
of  Ireland  in  the  misty  olden  time. 

One  or  two  of  them  are  worth  re-telling.  Mr. 
William  Larminie,  collecting  folk-tales  in  Achill 
Island,  took  one  from  the  lips  of  an  aged  peasant, 
which  tells  in  its  confused  way  what  might  almost 
be  called  the  central  incident  of  Gaelic  mythology, 
the  mysterious  birth  of  the  sun-god  from  demoniac 
parentage,  and  his  eventual  slaying  of  his  grand- 
father when  he  came  to  full  age.^ 

Gobhan  the  Architect  and  his  son,  young  Go- 
bhan,  runs  the  tale,  were  sent  for  by  Balor  of  the 
Blows  to  build  him  a  palace.  They  built  it  so  well 
that  Balor  decided  never  to  let  them  leave  his  king- 
dom alive,  for  fear  they  should  build  another  one 

*  Larminie:    West  Irish  Folk-Tales,  pp.  i-q. 


234         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

equally  good  for  someone  else.  He  therefore  had 
all  the  scaffolding  removed  from  round  the  palace 
while  they  were  still  on  the  top,  with  the  intention 
of  leaving  them  up  there  to  die  of  hunger.  But, 
when  they  discovered  this,  they  began  to  destroy 
the  roof,  so  that  Balor  was  obliged  to  let  them  come 
down. 

He,  none  the  less,  refused  to  allow  them  to  return 
to  Ireland.  The  crafty  Gobhan,  however,  had  his 
plan  ready.  He  told  Balor  that  the  injury  that  had 
been  done  to  the  palace  roof  could  not  be  repaired 
without  special  tools,  which  he  had  left  behind  him 
at  home.  Balor  declined  to  let  either  old  Gobhan 
or  young  Gobhan  go  back  to  fetch  them;  but  he 
offered  to  send  his  own  son.  Gobhan  gave  Balor's 
son  directions  for  the  journey.  He  was  to  travel 
until  he  came  to  a  house  with  a  stack  of  corn  at 
the  door.  Entering  it,  he  would  find  a  woman  with 
one  hand  and  a  child  with  one  eye. 

Balor's  son  found  the  house,  and  asked  the  woman 
for  the  tools.  She  expected  him;  for  it  had  been 
arranged  between  Gobhan  and  his  wife  what  should 
be  done,  if  Balor  refused  to  let  him  return.  She 
took  Balor's  son  to  a  huge  chest,  and  told  him  that 
the  tools  were  at  the  bottom  of  it,  so  far  down  that 
she  could  not  reach  them,  and  that  he  must  get  into 
the  chest,  and  pick  them  up  himself  But,  as  soon 
as  he  was  safely  inside,  she  shut  the  lid  on  him, 
telling  him  that  he  would  have  to  stay  there  until 
his  father  allowed  old  Gobhan  and  young  Gobhan 
to  come  home  with  their  pay.  And  she  sent  the 
same  message  to  Balor  himself 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       235 

There  was  an  exchange  of  prisoners,  Balor  giving 
the  two  Gobhans  their  pay  and  a  ship  to  take  them 
home,  and  Gobhan  s  wife  releasing  Balor's  son.  But, 
before  the  two  builders  went,  Balor  asked  them 
whom  he  should  now  employ  to  repair  his  palace. 
Old  Gobhan  told  him  that,  next  to  himself,  there 
was  no  workman  in  Ireland  better  than  one  Gavid- 
jeen  Go. 

When  Gobhan  got  back  to  Ireland,  he  sent  Gavid- 
jeen  Go  to  Balor.  But  he  gave  him  a  piece  of 
advice — to  accept  as  pay  only  one  thing:  Balor's 
gray  cow,  which  would  fill  twenty  barrels  at  one 
milking.  Balor  agreed  to  this,  but,  when  he  gave 
the  cow  to  Gavidjeen  Go  to  take  back  with  him  to 
Ireland,  he  omitted  to  include  her  byre-rope,  which 
was  the  only  thing  that  would  keep  her  from  return- 
ing to  her  original  owner. 

The  gray  cow  gave  so  much  trouble  to  Gavidjeen 
Go  by  her  straying,  that  he  was  obliged  to  hire  mili- 
tary champions  to  watch  her  during  the  day  and 
bring  her  safely  home  at  night.  The  bargain  made 
was  that  Gavidjeen  Go  should  forge  the  champion 
a  sword  for  his  pay,  but  that,  if  he  lost  the  cow,  his 
life  was  to  be  forfeited. 

At  last,  a  certain  warrior  called  Cian  was  unlucky 
enough  to  let  the  cow  escape.  He  followed  her 
tracks  down  to  the  sea-shore  and  right  to  the  edge 
of  the  waves,  and  there  he  lost  them  altogether.  He 
was  tearing  his  hair  in  his  perplexity,  when  he  saw 
a  man  rowing  a  coracle.  The  man,  who  was  no 
other  f.han  Mananndn  son  of  Ler,  came  in  close  to 
the  shore,  and  asked  what  was  the  matter. 


236         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Cian  told  him. 

**  What  would  you  give  to  anyone  who  would 
take  you  to  the  place  where  the  gray  cow  is?"  asked 
Mananndn. 

**  I  have  nothing  to  give,"  replied  Cian. 

"All  I  ask,"  said  Mananndn,  *'is  half  of  whatever 
you  gain  before  you  come  back." 

Cian  agreed  to  that  willingly  enough,  and  Man- 
anndn  told  him  to  get  into  the  coracle.  In  the  wink 
of  an  eye,  he  had  landed  him  in  Balor's  kingdom, 
the  realm  of  the  cold,  where  they  roast  no  meat,  but 
eat  their  food  raw.  Cian  was  not  used  to  this  diet, 
so  he  lit  himself  a  fire,  and  began  to  cook  some  food. 
Balor  saw  the  fire,  and  came  down  to  it,  and  he  was 
so  pleased  that  he  appointed  Cian  to  be  his  fire- 
maker  and  cook. 

Now  Balor  had  a  daughter,  of  whom  a  druid  had 
prophesied  that  she  would,  some  day,  bear  a  son  who 
would  kill  his  grandfather.  Therefore,  like  Acrisius, 
in  Greek  legend,  he  shut  her  up  in  a  tower,  guarded 
by  women,  and  allowed  her  to  see  no  man  but  him- 
self One  day,  Cian  saw  Balor  go  to  the  tower.  He 
waited  until  he  had  come  back,  and  then  went  to 
explore.  He  had  the  gift  of  opening  locked  doors 
and  shutting  them  again  after  him.  When  he  got 
inside,  he  lit  a  fire,  and  this  novelty  so  delighted 
Balor  s  daughter  that  she  invited  him  to  visit  her 
again.  After  this — in  the  Achill  islanders  quaint 
phrase — "he  was  ever  coming  there,  until  a  child 
happened  to  her."  Balor's  daughter  gave  the  baby 
to  Cian  to  take  away.  She  also  gave  him  the  byre- 
rope  which  belonged  to  the  gray  cow. 


13 


1-1    -R  .  M\LI 
CIAN    FINDS    BALOR'S    DAUGHTER 

From  the  Drawing  by  H.  R.  Miliar 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       237 

Cian  was  in  great  danger  now,  for  Balor  had 
found  out  about  the  child.  He  led  the  gray  cow 
away  with  the  rope  to  the  sea-shore,  and  waited  for 
Mananndn.  The  Son  of  L^r  had  told  Cian  that, 
when  he  was  in  any  difficulty,  he  was  to  think  of 
him,  and  he  would  at  once  appear.  Cian  thought 
of  him  now,  and,  in  a  moment,  Mananndn  appeared 
with  his  coracle.  Cian  got  into  the  boat,  with  the 
baby  and  the  gray  cow,  just  as  Balor,  in  hot  pursuit, 
came  down  to  the  beach. 

Balor,  by  his  incantations,  raised  a  great  storm  to 
drown  them;  but  Mananndn,  whose  druidism  was 
greater,  stilled  it.  Then  Balor  turned  the  sea  into 
fire,  to  burn  them;  but  Mananndn  put  it  out  with  a 
stone. 

When  they  were  safe  back  in  Ireland,  Manannan 
asked  Cian  for  his  promised  reward. 

*'  I  have  gained  nothing  but  the  boy,  and  I  cannot 
cut  him  in  two,  so  I  will  give  him  to  you  whole,"  he 
replied. 

**That  is  what  I  was  wanting  all  the  time,"  said 
Mananndn;  **  when  he  grows  up,  there  will  be  no 
champion  equal  to  him." 

So  Mananndn  baptized  the  boy,  calling  him  **the 
Dul-Dauna".  This  name,  meaning  "■  Blind-Stub- 
born", is  certainly  a  curious  corruption  of  the  original 
loldanach^  ''  Master  of  all  Knowledge".  When  the 
boy  had  grown  up,  he  went  one  day  to  the  sea- 
shore. A  ship  came  past,  in  which  was  a  man. 
The  traditions  of  Donnybrook  Fair  are  evidently 
prehistoric,  for  the  boy,  without  troubling  to  ask  who 

1  Pronounced  Ilddna. 


238         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  stranger  was,  took  a  dart  **out  of  his  pocket", 
hurled  it,  and  hit  him.  The  man  in  the  boat  happened 
to  be  Balor.  Thus,  in  accordance  with  the  prophecy, 
he  was  slain  by  his  grandson,  who,  though  the  folk- 
tale does  not  name  him,  was  obviously  Lugh. 

Another  version  of  the  same  legend,  collected  by 
the  Irish  scholar  O' Donovan  on  the  coast  of  Donegal, 
opposite  Balor  s  favourite  haunt,  Tory  Island,  is 
interesting  as  completing  the  one  just  narrated/  In 
this  folk-tale,  Goibniu  is  called  Gavida,  and  is  made 
one  of  three  brothers,  the  other  two  being  called 
Mac  Kineely  and  Mac  Samthainn.  They  were  chiefs 
of  Donegal,  smiths  and  farmers,  while  Balor  was  a 
robber  who^  harassed  the  mainland  from  his  strong- 
hold on  Tory  Island.  The  gray  cow  belonged  to 
Mac  Kineely,  and  Balor  stole  it.  Its  owner  deter- 
mined to  be  revenged,  and,  knowing  the  prediction 
concerning  Balor  s  death  at  the  hands  of  an  as  yet 
unborn  grandson,  he  persuaded  a  kindly  fairy  to 
spirit  him  in  female  disguise  to  Tor  Mor,  where 
Balor  s  daughter,  who  was  called  Ethnea,  was  kept 
imprisoned.  The  result  of  this  expedition  was  not 
merely  the  one  son  necessary  to  fulfil  the  prophecy, 
but  three.  This  apparent  superfluity  was  fortunate; 
for  Balor  drowned  two  of  them,  the  other  being 
picked  out  of  the  sea  by  the  same  fairy  who  had 
been  incidentally  responsible  for  his  birth,  and 
handed  over  to  his  father,  Mac  Kineely,  to  be 
brought  up.  Shortly  after  this,  Balor  managed  to 
capure  Mac  Kineely,  and,  in  retaliation  for  the  wrong 
done  him,  chopped  off  his  head  upon  a  large  white 

1  It  is  told  in  Rhys's  Hibbert  Lectures^  pp.  314-317. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       239 

stone,  still  known  locally  as  the  **  Stone  of  Kineely". 
Satisfied  with  this,  and  quite  unaware  that  one  of 
his  daughter  s  children  had  been  saved  from  death, 
and  was  now  being  brought  up  as  a  smith  by  Gavida, 
Balor  went  on  with  his  career  of  robbery,  varying  it 
by  visits  to  the  forge  to  purchase  arms.  One  day, 
being  there  during  Gavida  s  absence,  he  began  boast- 
ing to  the  young  assistant  of  how  he  had  compassed 
Mac  Kineely  s  death.  He  never  finished  the  story, 
for  Lugh — which  was  the  boy's  name — snatched  a 
red-hot  iron  from  the  fire,  and  thrust  it  into  Balor's 
eye,  and  through  his  head. 

Thus,  in  these  two  folk- tales,  ^  gathered  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  Ireland,  at  different  times,  by 
different  persons,  survives  quite  a  mass  of  mytho- 
logical detail  only  to  be  found  otherwise  in 
ancient  manuscripts  containing  still  more  ancient 
matter.  Crystallized  in  them  may  be  found  the 
names  of  six  members  of  the  old  Gaelic  Pantheon, 
each  filling  the  same  part  as  of  old.  Goibniu  has 
not  lost  his  mastery  of  smithcraft;  Balor  is  still  the 
Fomorian  king  of  the  cold  regions  of  the  sea;  his 
daughter  Ethniu  becomes,  by  Cian,  the  mother  of 
the  sun-god;  Lugh,  who  still  bears  his  old  title  of 
loldanach,  though  it  is  strangely  corrupted  into  a 
name  meaning  almost  the  exact  opposite,  is  still 
fostered  by  Mananndn,  Son  of  the  Sea,  and  in  the 
end  grows  up  to  destroy  his  grandfather  by  a  blow 
in  the  one  vulnerable  place,  his  death-dealing  eye. 
Perhaps,  too,  we  may  claim  to  see  a  genuine,  though 

1  For  still  other  folk-tale  versions  of  this  same  myth  see  Curtin's  Hero  Tales  of 
Ireland. 


240         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

jumbled  tradition,  in  the  Fomor-like  deformities  of 
Gobhan's  wife  and  child,  and  in  the  story  of  the 
gray  cow  and  her  byre-rope,  which  recalls  that  of 
the  Dagda's  black-maned  heifer.  Ocean. 

The  memories  of  the  peasantry  still  hold  many 
stories  of  Lugh,  as  well  as  of  Angus,  and  others  of 
the  old  gods.  But,  next  to  the  Gobhan  Saer,  the 
one  whose  fame  is  still  greatest  is  that  ever-potent 
and  ever-popular  figure,  the  great  Manannan. 

The  last,  perhaps,  to  receive  open  adoration,  he  is 
represented  by  kindly  tradition  as  having  been  still 
content  to  help  and  watch  over  the  people  who  had 
rejected  and  ceased  to  worship  him.  Up  to  the 
time  of  St.  Columba,  he  was  the  special  guardian 
of  Irishmen  in  foreign  parts,  assisting  them  in  their 
dangers  and  bringing  them  home  safe.  For  the 
peasantry,  too,  he  caused  favourable  weather  and 
good  crops.  His  fairy  subjects  tilled  the  ground  while 
men  slept.  But  this  is  said  to  have  come  to  an  end 
at  last  Saint  Columba,  having  broken  his  golden 
chalice,  gave  it  to  a  servant  to  get  repaired.  On 
his  way,  the  servant  was  met  by  a  stranger,  who 
asked  him  where  he  was  going.  The  man  told 
him,  and  showed  him  the  chalice.  The  stranger 
breathed  upon  it,  and,  at  once,  the  broken  parts  re- 
united. Then  he  begged  him  to  return  to  his  master, 
give  him  the  chalice,  and  tell  him  that  Mananndn 
son  of  Ler,  who  had  mended  it,  desired  to  know  in 
very  truth  whether  he  would  ever  attain  paradise. 
"Alas,"  said  the  ungrateful  saint,  **  there  is  no  for- 
giveness for  a  man  who  does  such  works  as  this!" 
The  servant  went  back  with  the  answer,  and  Man- 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       241 

anndn,  when  he  heard  it,  broke  out  into  indignant 
lament.  "Woe  is  me,  Manannin  mac  Ler!  for 
years  I've  helped  the  Catholics  of  Ireland,  but  I'll 
do  it  no  more,  till  they're  as  weak  as  water.  I'll  go 
to  the  gray  waves  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland."^ 

And  there  he  remained.  For,  unless  the  charm- 
ing stories  of  Miss  Fiona  Macleod  are  mere  beautiful 
imaginings  and  nothing  more,  he  is  not  unknown 
even  to-day  among  the  solitary  shepherds  and  fishers 
of  **the  farthest  Hebrides".  In  the  Contemporary 
Review  for  October,  1902,^  she  tells  how  an  old 
man  of  four-score  years  would  often  be  visited  in 
his  shieling  by  a  tall,  beautiful  stranger,  with  a  crest 
on  his  head,  'Mike  white  canna  blowing  in  the  wind, 
but  with  a  blueness  in  it",  and  **a  bright,  cold,  curl- 
ing flame  under  the  soles  of  his  feet".  The  man 
told  him  many  things,  and  prophesied  to  him  the 
time  of  his  death.  Generally,  the  stranger's  hands 
were  hidden  in  the  folds  of  the  white  cloak  he  wore, 
but,  once,  he  moved  to  touch  the  shepherd,  who  saw 
then  that  his  flesh  was  like  water,  with  sea-weed 
floating  among  the  bones.  So  that  Murdo  Maclan 
knew  that  he  could  be  speaking  with  none  other 
than  the  Son  of  the  Sea. 

Nor  is  he  yet  quite  forgotten  in  his  own  Island  of 
Man,  of  which  local  tradition  says  he  was  the.  first 
inhabitant.  He  is  also  described  as  its  king,  who 
kept  it  from  invasion  by  his  magic.  He  would  cause 
mists  to  rise  at  any  moment  and  conceal  the  island, 


1  A  Donegal  story,  collected  by  Mr.   David  Fitzgerald  and  published  in  the 
Revue  Celtique,  VoL  IV,  p.  x'j'j. 
*  The  paper  is  called  "  Sea-Magic  and  Running  Water  ". 

rB219)  Q 


242         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

and  by  the  same  glamour  he  could  make  one  man 
seem  like  a  hundred,  and  little  chips  of  wood  which 
he  threw  into  the  water  to  appear  like  ships  of  war. 
It  is  no  wonder  that  he  held  his  kingdom  against 
all-comers,  until  his  sway  was  ended,  like  that  of 
the  other  Gaelic  gods,  by  the  arrival  of  Saint 
Patrick.  After  this,  he  seems  to  have  declined 
into  a  traditionary  giant  who  used  to  leap  from 
Peel  Castle  to  Contrary  Head  for  exercise,  or  hurl 
huge  rocks,  upon  which  the  mark  of  his  hand  can 
still  be  seen.  It  is  said  that  he  took  no  tribute 
from  his  subjects,  or  worshippers  except  bundles  of 
green  rushes,  which  were  placed  every  Midsummer 
Eve  upon  two  mountain  peaks,  one  called  Warre- 
field  in  olden  days,  but  now  South  Barrule,  and 
the  other  called  Man,  and  not  now  to  be  identified. 
His  grave,  which  is  thirty  yards  long,  is  pointed 
out,  close  to  Peel  Castle.  The  most  curious  legend 
connected  with  him,  however,  tells  us  that  he  had 
three  legs,  on  which  he  used  to  travel  at  a  great 
pace.  How  this  was  done  may  be  seen  from  the 
arms  of  the  island,  on  which  are  pictured  his  three 
limbs,  joined  together,  and  spread  out  like  the 
spokes  of  a  wheel.  ^ 

An  Irish  tradition  tells  us  that,  when  Mananndn 
left  Ireland  for  Scotland,  the  vacant  kingship  of  the 
gods  or  fairies  was  taken  by  one  Mac  Moineanta, 
to  the  great  grief  of  those  who  had  known  Man- 
anndn.^  Perhaps  this  great  grief  led  to  Mac  Moine- 
anta's  being  deposed,  for  the  present  king  of  the 

1  Moore :  Folklore  of  the  Isle  of  Man. 

*  See  an  article  in  the  Dublin  University  Magazine  for  June,  1864 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       243 

Irish  fairies  is  Finvarra,  the  same  Fionnbharr  to 
whom  the  Dagda  allotted  the  sidh  of  Meadha  after 
the  conquest  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  by  the 
Milesians,  and  who  takes  a  prominent  part  in  the 
Fenian  stories.  So  great  is  the  persistence  of 
tradition  in  Ireland  that  this  hill  of  Meadha,  now 
spelt  Knockma,  is  still  considered  to  be  the  abode 
of  him  and  his  queen,  Onagh.  Numberless  stories 
are  told  about  Finvarra,  including,  of  course,  that 
very  favourite  Celtic  tale  of  the  stolen  bride,  and 
her  recapture  from  the  fairies  by  the  siege  and 
digging  up  of  the  sidh  in  which  she  was  held 
prisoner.  Finvarra,  like  Mider  of  Bri  Leith,  carried 
away  a  human  Etain — the  wife,  not  of  a  high  king, 
but  of  an  Irish  lord.  The  modern  Eochaid  Airem, 
having  heard  an  invisible  voice  tell  him  where  he 
was  to  look  for  his  lost  bride,  gathered  all  his 
workmen  and  labourers  and  proceeded  to  demolish 
Knockma.  Every  day  they  almost  dug  it  up,  but 
every  night  the  breach  was  found  to  have  been 
repaired  by  fairy  workmen  of  Finvarra's.  This 
went  on  for  three  days,  when  the  Irish  lord  thought 
of  the  well-known  device  of  sanctifying  the  work 
of  excavation  by  sprinkling  the  turned-up  earth 
with  salt.  Needless  to  say,  it  succeeded.  Finvarra 
gave  back  the  bride,  still  in  the  trance  into  which 
he  had  thrown  her;  and  the  deep  cut  into  the 
fairy  hill  still  remains  to  furnish  proof  to  the  in- 
credulous.^ 

Finvarra  does    not   always   appear,   however,   in 

1  The  story  is  among  those  told  by  Lady  Wilde  in  her  Ancient  Legends  of 
Ireland,  VoL  I,  pp.  77-Sa. 


244         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

such  unfriendly  guise.  He  was  popularly  reputed 
to  have  under  his  special  care  the  family  of  the 
Kirwans  of  Castle  Hacket,  on  the  northern  slope 
of  Knockma.  Owing  to  his  benevolent  influence, 
the  castle  cellars  never  went  dry,  nor  did  the 
quality  of  the  wine  deteriorate.  Besides  the  wine- 
cellar,  Finvarra  looked  after  the  stables,  and  it 
was  owing  to  the  exercise  that  he  and  his  fairy 
followers  gave  the  horses  by  night  that  Mr.  John 
Kirwan's  racers  were  so  often  successful  on  the 
Curragh.  That  such  stories  could  have  passed 
current  as  fact,  which  they  undoubtedly  did,  is 
excellent  proof  of  how  late  and  how  completely  a 
mythology  may  survive  among  the  uncultured.^ 

Finvarra  rules  to-day  over  a  wide  realm  of  fairy 
folk.  Many  of  these,  again,  have  their  own  vassal 
chieftains,  forming  a  tribal  hierarchy  such  as  must 
have  existed  in  the  Celtic  days  of  Ireland.  Fin- 
varra and  Onagh  are  high  king  and  queen,  but, 
under  them,  Cliodna^  is  tributary  queen  of  Munster, 
and  rules  from  a  sidh  near  Mallow  in  County  Cork, 
while,  under  her  again,  are  Aoibhinn^  queen  of  the 
fairies  of  North  Munster,  and  Aine,  queen  of  the 
fairies  of  South  Munster.  These  names  form  but 
a  single  instance.  A  map  of  fairy  Ireland  could 
without  much  difficulty  be  drawn,  showing,  with 
almost  political  exactness,  the  various  kingdoms  of 
the  Sidhe. 

Far  less  easy,  however,  would  be  the  task  of 
ascertaining  the  origin  and  lineage  of  these  fabled 

'  Dublin  University  Magazine,  June,  1864. 

*  Pronounced  Cleena.  ^  Pronounced  Evin» 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       245 

beings.  Some  of  them  can  still  be  traced  as  older 
gods  and  goddesses.  In  the  eastern  parts  of  Ireland, 
Badb  and  her  sisters  have  become  ''  banshees  "  who 
wail  over  deaths  not  necessarily  found  in  battle. 
Aynia,  deemed  the  most  powerful  fairy  in  Ulster, 
and  Ain6,  queen  of  South  Munster,  are  perhaps 
the  same  person,  the  mysterious  and  awful  goddess 
once  adored  as  Anu,  or  Danu.  Of  the  two, 
it  is  Aine  who  especially  seems  to  carry  on  the 
traditions  of  the  older  Anu,  worshipped,  according 
to  the  **  Choice  of  Names",  in  Munster  as  a  goddess 
of  prosperity  and  abundance.  Within  living  memory, 
she  was  propitiated  by  a  magical  ritual  upon  every 
Saint  John's  Eve,  to  ensure  fertility  during  the 
coming  year.  The  villagers  round  her  sidh  of  Cnoc 
Ain6  (Knockainy)  carried  burning  bunches  of  hay 
or  straw  upon  poles  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  thence 
dispersed  among  the  fields,  waving  these  torches 
over  the  crops  and  cattle.  This  fairy,  or  goddess 
was  held  to  be  friendly,  and,  indeed,  more  than 
friendly,  to  men.  Whether  or  not  she  were  the 
mother  of  the  gods,  she  is  claimed  as  first  ancestress 
by  half  a  dozen  famous  Irish  families. 

Among  her  children  was  the  famous  Earl  Gerald, 
offspring  of  her  alliance  with  the  fourth  Earl  of 
Desmond,  known  as  **  The  Magician  ".  As  in  the 
well-known  story  of  the  Swan-maidens,  the  magician- 
earl  is  said  to  have  stolen  Ainu's  cloak  while  she 
was  bathing,  and  refused  to  return  it  unless  she 
became  his  bride.  But,  in  the  end,  he  lost  her. 
Ain6  had  warned  her  husband  never  to  show  sur- 
prise at  anything  done  by  their  son ;  but  a  wonderful 


246         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

feat  which  he  performed  made  the  earl  break  this 
condition,  and  Ain6  was  obliged,  by  fairy  law,  to 
leave  him.  But,  though  she  had  lost  her  husband, 
she  was  not  separated  from  her  son,  who  was  re- 
ceived into  the  fairy  world  after  his  death,  and  now 
lives  under  the  surface  of  Lough  Gur,  in  County 
Limerick,  waiting,  like  the  British  Arthur,  for  the 
hour  to  strike  in  which  he  shall  lead  forth  his  war- 
riors to, drive  the  foreigners  from  Ireland.  But  this 
will  not  be  until,  by  riding  round  the  lake  once  in 
every  seventh  year,  he  shall  have  worn  his  horse's 
silver  shoes  as  thin  as  a  cat's  ear.^ 

Not  only  the  tribe  of  Danu,  but  heroes  of  the 
other  mythical  cycles  swell  the  fairy  host  to-day. 
Donn,  son  of  Mil6,  who  was  drowned  before  ever 
he  set  foot  on  Irish  soil,  lives  at  *'  Donn's  House  ", 
a  line  of  sand-hills  in  the  Dingle  Peninsula  of  Kerry, 
and,  as  late  as  the  eighteenth  century,  we  find  him 
invoked  by  a  local  poet,  half  in  jest,  no  doubt,  but 
still,  perhaps  also  a  little  in  earnest*  The  heroes  of 
Ulster  have  no  part  in  fairyland;  but  their  enemy, 
Medb,  is  credited  with  queenly  rule  among  the 
Sfdhe,  and  is  held  by  some  to  have  been  the  original 
of  "  Queen  Mab ".  Caoilt6,  last  of  the  Fenians, 
was,  in  spite  of  his  leanings  towards  Christianity, 
enrolled  among  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  but  none 
of  his  kin  are  known  there,  neither  Ossian,  nor 
Oscar,  nor  even  Finn  himself  Yet  not  even  to 
merely  historical  mortals  are  the  gates  of  the  gods 
necessarily  closed.     The  Barry,  chief  of  the  barony 

^  See  Fitzgerald,  Popular  Tales  of  Ireland,  in  Vol.  IV  of  the  Revue  Celtiqne. 
2  Dublin  University  Magazine,  June,  1864. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       247 

of  Barrymore,  is  said  to  inhabit  an  enchanted  palace 
in  Knockthierna,  one  of  the  Nagles  Hills.  The  not 
less  traditionally  famous  O'Donaghue,  whose  domain 
was  near  Killarney,  now  dwells  beneath  the  waters 
of  that  lake,  and  may  still  be  seen,  it  is  said,  upon 
May  Day.^ 

But  besides  these  figures,  which  can  be  traced  in 
mythology  or  history,  and  others  who,  though  all 
written  record  of  them  has  perished,  are  obviously 
of  the  same  character,  there  are  numerous  beings 
who  suggest  a  different  origin  from  that  of  the 
Aryan-seeming  fairies.  They  correspond  to  the 
elves  and  trolls  of  Scandinavian,  or  the  silenoi  and 
satyrs  of  Greek  myth.  Such  is  the  Leprechaun, 
who  makes  shoes  for  the  fairies,  and  knows  where 
hidden  treasures  are;  the  Gan  Ceanach,  or  'Move- 
talker  ",  who  fills  the  ears  of  idle  girls  with  pleasant 
fancies  when,  to  merely  mortal  ideas,  they  should  be 
busy  with  their  work ;  the  Pooka,  who  leads  travellers 
astray,  or,  taking  the  shape  of  an  ass  or  mule, 
beguiles  them  to  mount  upon  his  back  to  their 
discomfiture;  the  Dulachan,  who  rides  without  a 
head;  and  other  friendly  or  malicious  sprites. 
Whence  come  they?  A  possible  answer  suggests 
itself.  Preceding  the  Aryans,  and  surviving  the 
Aryan  conquest  all  over  Europe,  was  a  large  non- 
Aryan  population,  which  must  have  had  its  own 
gods,  who  would  retain  their  worship,  be  revered 
by  successive  generations,  and  remain  rooted  to  the 
soil.     May  not  these   uncouth   and   half-developed 

1  For  stories  of  these  two  Norman-Irish  heroes,  see  Crofton  Croker's  Fairy 
Legends  and  Traditions  of  the  South  of  Ireland. 


248         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Irish  Leprechauns,  Pookas,  and  Dulachans,  together 
with  the  Scotch  Cluricanes,  Brownies,  and  their 
kin,  be  no  **  creations  of  popular  fancy ",  but  the 
dwindling  figures  of  those  darker  gods  of  **  the  dark 
Iberians"? 


THE  BRITISH  GODS  AND  THEIR 

STORIES 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE   GODS    OF   THE    BRITONS 

The  descriptions  and  the  stories  of  the  British 
gods  have  hardly  come  down  to  us  in  so  ample  or 
so  compact  a  form  as  those  of  the  deities  of  the 
Gaels,  as  they  are  preserved  in  the  Irish  and  Scot- 
tish manuscripts.  They  have  also  suffered  far  more 
from  the  sophistications  of  the  euhemerist.  Only 
in  the  "Four  Branches  of  the  Mabinogi"  do  the 
gods  of  the  Britons  appear  in  anything  like  their 
real  character  of  supernatural  beings,  masters  of 
magic,  and  untrammelled  by  the  limitations  which 
hedge  in  mortals.  Apart  from  those  four  fragments 
of  mythology,  and  from  a  very  few  scattered  refer- 
ences in  the  early  Welsh  poems,  one  must  search 
for  them  under  strange  disguises.  Some  masquerade 
as  kings  in  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  more  than 
apocryphal  Historia  Britonum,  Others  have  re- 
ceived an  undeserved  canonization,  which  must  be 
stripped  from  them  before  they  can  be  seen  in  their 
true  colours.  Others,  again,  were  adopted  by  the 
Norman- French  romancers,  and  turned  into  the 
champions  of  chivalry  now  known  as  Arthur's 
Knights  of  the  Round  Table.  But,  however  dis- 
guised, their  real  nature  can  still  be  discerned.  The 
Gaels  and  the  Britons  were  but  two  branches  of  one 

S61 


252         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

race — the  Celtic.  In  many  of  the  gods  of  the  Britons 
we  shall  recognize,  with  names  alike  and  attributes 
the  same,  the  familiar  features  of  the  Gaelic  Tuatha 
D6  Danann.  » 

The  British  gods  are  sometimes  described  as 
divided  into  three  families — the  "  Children  of  Don  ", 
the  ** Children  of  Nudd",  and  the  "Children  of 
Llyr**.  But  these  three  families  are  really  only 
two;  for  Nudd,  or  Lludd,  as  he  is  variously  called, 
is  himself  described  as  a  son  of  Beli,  who  was  the 
husband  of  the  goddess  Don.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  Don  herself  is  the  same  divine  personage 
as  Danu,  the  mother  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann, 
and  that  Beli  is  the  British  equivalent  of  the  Gaelic 
Bil6,  the  universal  Dis  Pater  who  sent  out  the  first 
Gaels  from  Hades  to  take  possession  of  Ireland. 
With  the  other  family,  the  ''Children  of  Llyr",  we 
are  equally  on  familiar  ground;  for  the  British  Llyr 
can  be  none  other  than  the  Gaelic  sea-god  L^r. 
These  two  families  or  tribes  are  usually  regarded  as 
in  opposition,  and  their  struggles  seem  to  symbolize 
in  British  myth  that  same  conflict  between  the 
powers  of  heaven,  light,  and  life  and  of  the  sea, 
darkness,  and  death  which  are  shadowed  in  Gaelic 
mythology  in  the  battles  between  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann  and  the  Fomors. 

For  the  children  of  Don  were  certainly  gods  of 
the  sky.  Their  names  are  writ  large  in  heaven. 
The  glittering  W  which  we  call  ''Cassiopeia's 
Chair"  was  to  our  British  ancestors  Llys  Don,  or 
*' Ddn's  Court";  our  "Northern  Crown"  was  Caer 
Arianrodj  the  "Castle  of  Arianrod",  Don's  daughter; 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  253 

while  the  *'Milky  Way"  was  the  ''Castle  of  Gwydion", 
D6n  s  son.^  More  than  this,  the  greatest  of  her 
children,  the  Nudd  or  Lludd  whom  some  make  the 
head  of  a  dynasty  of  his  own,  was  the  Zeus  alike  of 
the  Britons  and  of  the  Gaels.  His  epithet  of  Llaw 
Ereint,  that  is,  "of  the  Hand  of  Silver",  proves 
him  the  same  personage  as  Nuada  the  ''  Silver- 
Handed".  The  legend  which  must  have  existed 
to  explain  this  peculiarity  has  been  lost  on  British 
ground,  but  it  was  doubtless  the  same  as  that  told 
of  the  Irish  god.  With  it,  and,  no  doubt,  much  else, 
has  disappeared  any  direct  account  of  battles  fought 
by  him  as  sky-god  against  Fomor-like  enemies. 
But,  under  the  faint  disguise  of  a  king  of  Britain, 
an  ancient  Welsh  tale^  records  how  he  put  an  end 
to  three  supernatural  ''plagues"  which  oppressed 
his  country.  In  addition  to  this,  we  find  him  under 
his  name  of  Nudd  described  in  a  Welsh  Triad  as 
one  of  "the  three  generous  heroes  of  the  Isle  of 
Britain ",  while  another  makes  him  the  owner  of 
twenty-one  thousand  milch  cows  —  an  expression 
which  must,  to  the  primitive  mind,  have  implied 
inexhaustible  wealth.  Both  help  us  to  the  con- 
ception of  a  god  of  heaven  and  battle,  triumphant, 
and  therefore  rich  and  liberal.^ 

More  tangible  evidence  is,  however,  not  lacking 
to  prove  the  wide-spread  nature  of  his  worship.  A 
temple  dedicated  to  him  in  Roman  times  under  the 
name  of  Nodens,  or  Nudens,  has  been  discovered  at 


1  Lady  Guest's  Mabinogion,  a  note  to  Math,  the  Son  of  Mathonwy. 
*  The  Story  of  Lludd  and  Llevelys.     See  chap,  xxiv— "  The  Decline  and  Fall  of 
the  Gods  ".  3  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  128. 


254         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Lydney,  on  the  banks  of  the  Severn.  The  god  is 
pictured  on  a  plaque  of  bronze  as  a  youthful  deity, 
haloed  like  the  sun,  and  driving  a  four-horsed 
chariot  Flying  spirits,  typifying  the  winds,  accom- 
pany him;  while  his  power  over  the  sea  is  symbol- 
ized by  attendant  Tritons.^  This  was  in  the  west  of 
Britain,  while,  in  the  east,  there  is  good  reason  to 
believe  that  he  had  a  shrine  overlooking  the  Thames. 
Tradition  declares  that  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  occu- 
pies the  site  of  an  ancient  pagan  temple;  while  the 
spot  on  which  it  stands  was  called,  we  know  from 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  **  Parth  Lludd "  by  the 
Britons,  and  "  Ludes  Geat"  by  the  Saxons.^ 

Great,  however,  as  he  probably  was,  Lludd,  or 
Nudd  occupies  less  space  in  Welsh  story,  as  we 
have  it  now,  than  his  son.  Gwyn  ap  Nudd  has 
outlived  in  tradition  almost  all  his  supernatural  kin. 
Professor  Rhys  is  tempted  to  see  in  him  the  British 
equivalent  of  the  Gaelic  Finn  mac  Cumhail.^  The 
name  of  both  alike  means  ** white";  both  are  sons 
of  the  heaven-god ;  both  are  famed  as  hunters. 
Gwyn,  however,  is  more  than  that;  for  his  game  is 
man.  In  the  early  Welsh  poems,  he  is  a  god  of 
battle  and  of  the  dead,  and,  as  such,  fills  the  part  of 
a  psychopompos,  conducting  the  slain  into  Hades, 
and  there  ruling  over  them.  In  later,  semi- 
Christianized  story  he  is  described  as  ''  Gwyn,  son 
of  Nudd,  whom  God  has  placed  over  the  brood  of 
devils  in  Annwn,  lest  they  should  destroy  the  pre- 

1  See  a  monograph  by  the  Right  Hon.  Charles  Bathurst :  Roman  Antiquities  in 
Lydney  Park,  Gloucestershire. 

2  See  chap,  xxiv— "  The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods  ". 
'  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  178,  179. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  255 

sent  race^".  Later  again,  as  paganism  still  further 
degenerated,  he  came  to  be  considered  as  king  of 
the  Tylwyth  Teg,  the  Welsh  fairies,^  and  his  name 
as  such  has  hardly  yet  died  out  of  his  last  haunt,  the 
romantic  vale  of  Neath.  He  is  the  wild  huntsman 
of  Wales  and  the  West  of  England,  and  it  is  his 
pack  which  is  sometimes  heard  at  chase  in  waste 
places  by  night. 

In  his  earliest  guise,  as  a  god  of  war  and  death, 
he  is  the  subject  of  a  poem  in  dialogue  contained  in 
the  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen.^  Obscure,  like 
most  of  the  ancient  Welsh  poems,*  it  is  yet  a 
spirited  production,  and  may  be  quoted  here  as  a 
favourable  specimen  of  the  poetry  of  the  early 
Cymri.  In  it  we  shall  see  mirrored  perhaps  the 
clearest  figure  of  the  British  Pantheon,  the  "  mighty 
hunter  ",  not  of  deer,  but  of  men's  souls,  ridincr  his 
demon  horse,  and  cheering  on  his  demon  hound  to 
the  fearful  chase.  He  knows  when  and  where  all 
the  great  warriors  fell,  for  he  gathered  their  souls 
upon  the  field  of  battle,  and  now  rules  over  them  in 
Hades,  or  upon  some  **  misty  mountain-top  ".^  It 
describes  a  mythical  prince,  named  Gwyddneu 
Garanhir,  known  to  Welsh  legend  as  the  ruler  of 
a  lost  country  now  covered  by  the  waters  of  Car- 
digan   Bay,    asking    protection    of   the    god,    who 


>  So  translated  by  Lady  Guest.  Professor  Rhys,  however,  renders  it,  "in  whom 
viod  has  put  the  instinct  of  the  demons  of  Annwn  ".     Arthurian  Legend,  p.  341. 

^  Lady  Guest's  Mabinogion.     Note  to  "  Kulhwch  and  Olwen". 

8  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen,  poem  xxxiii.  Vol.  I,  p.  293,  of  Skene's  Four 
Ancient  Books. 

*  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  omitting  a  few  lines  whose  connection  with  their 
context  is  not  very  apparent. 

•  Gwyn  was  said  to  specially  frequent  the  summits  of  hills. 


256         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

accords  it,   and  then   relates  the  story  of  his  ex- 
ploits : 

Gwyddneu, 

A  bull  of  conflict  was  he,  active  in  dispersing  an  arrayed 

army. 
The  ruler  of  hosts,  indisposed  to  anger. 
Blameless  and  pure  his  conduct  in  protecting  life. 

Gwyn, 

Against  a  hero  stout  was  his  advance, 

The  ruler  of  hosts,  disposer  of  wrath. 

There  will  be  protection  for  thee  since  thou  askest  it 

Gwyddneu, 

For  thou  hast  given  me  protection 
How  warmly  wert  thou  welcomed! 
The  hero  of  hosts,  from  what  region  thou  comest? 

Gwyn, 

I  come  from  battle  and  conflict 

With  a  shield  in  my  hand ; 

Broken  is  the  helmet  by  the  pushing  of  spears. 

Gwyddneu, 

I  will  address  thee,  exalted  man, 
With  his  shield  in  distress. 
Brave  man,  what  is  thy  descent? 

GwyfU 

Round-hoofed  is  my  horse,  the  torment  of  battle, 
Fairy  am  I  called,  Gwyn  the  son  of  Nudd,^ 
The  lover  of  Creurdilad,  the  daughter  of  Lludd. 

1  This  line  is  Professor  Rhys's.     Skene  translates  it:  "  Whilst  I  am  called  Gwy 
tkeson  of  Nudd". 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  257 

Gwyddneu. 

Since  it  is  thou,  Gw^n,  an  upright  man, 
From  thee  there  is  no  concealing: 
I  am  Gwyddneu  Garanhir. 

Gwyn, 

Hasten  to  my  ridge,  the  Tawe  abode; 
Not  the  nearest  Tawe  name  I  to  thee, 
But  that  Tawe  which  is  the  farthest.^ 

Polished  is  my  ring,  golden  my  saddle  and  bright: 

To  my  sadness 

I  saw  a  conflict  before  Caer  Vandwy.^ 

Before  Caer  Vandwy  a  host  I  saw. 

Shields  were  shattered  and  ribs  broken ; 

Renowned  and  splendid  was  he  who  made  the  assault. 

Gwyddneu. 

Gwyn,  son  of  Nudd,  the  hope  of  armies, 
Quicker  would  legions  fall  before  the  hoofs 
Of  thy  horse  than  broken  rushes  to  the  ground. 

Gwyn, 

Handsome  my  dog,  and  round-bodied, 

And  truly  the  best  of  dogs ; 

Dormarth'  was  he,  which  belonged  to  Maelgwyn. 

Gwyddneu. 

Dormarth  with  the  ruddy  nose!  what  a  gazer 
Thou  art  upon  me  because  I  notice 
Thy  wanderings  on  Gwibir  Vynyd.* 

1  I  have  here  preferred  Rhys' s  rendering:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  364. 

*  A  name  for  Hades,  of  unknown  meaning. 

*  Dormarth  means  "Death's  Door".     Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  156-158. 

*  Rhys  has  it : 

"Dormarth,  red-nosed,  ground-grazing — 
On  him  we  perceived  the  speed 
Of  thy  wandering  on  Cloud  Mount." 

— Arthurian  Legend,  p.  156. 
(B21d)  B 


258         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Gwyn. 

I  have  been  in  the  place  where  was  killed  Gwendoleu, 
The  son  of  Ceidaw,  the  pillar  of  songs, 
When  the  ravens  screamed  over  blood. 

I  have  been  in  the  place  where  Bran  was  killed, 
The  son  of  Iweridd,  of  far  extending  fame, 
When  the  ravens  of  the  battle-field  screamed. 

I  have  been  where  Llacheu  was  slain, 
The  son  of  Arthur,  extolled  in  songs. 
When  the  ravens  screamed  over  blood. 

I  have  been  where  Meurig  was  killed, 
The  son  of  Carreian,  of  honourable  fame, 
When  the  ravens  screamed  over  flesh. 

I  have  been  where  Gwallawg  was  killed. 
The  son  of  Goholeth,  the  accomplished. 
The  resister  of  Lloegyr,  the  son  of  Lleynawg. 

I  have  been  where  the  soldiers  of  Britain  were  slain, 
From  the  east  to  the  north: 
I  am  the  escort  of  the  grave.'' 

I  have  been  where  the  soldiers  of  Britain  were  slain. 
From  the  east  to  the  south: 
I  am  alive,  they  in  death! 

A  line  in  this  poem  allows  us  to  see  Gv^yn  in 
another  and  less  sinister  role.  ''  The  lover  of 
Creurdilad,  the  daughter  of  Lludd,"  he  calls  himself; 
and  an  episode  in  the  mythical  romance  of  **  Kul- 
hwch  and  Olv^en'*,  preserved  in  the  Red  Book  of 
Herges t,  gives  the  details  of  his  courtship.  Gwyn 
had  as  rival  a  deity  called  Gwyrthur  ap  Greidawl, 

1  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  383.    Skene  translates:  "  I  am  alive,  they  in  their 
graves  1 " 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  259 

that  is  "Victor,  son  of  Scorcher".^  These  two 
waged  perpetual  war  for  Creurdilad,  or  Creudy- 
lad,  each  in  turn  stealing  her  from  the  other,  until 
the  matter  was  referred  to  Arthur,  who  decided  that 
Creudylad  should  be  sent  back  to  her  father,  and 
that  Gwyn  and  Gwyrthur  **  should  fight  for  her 
every  first  of  May,  from  henceforth  until  the  day 
of  doom,  and  that  whichever  of  them  should  then 
be  conqueror  should  have  the  maiden ".  What 
satisfaction  this  would  be  to  the  survivor  of  what 
might  be  somewhat  flippantly  described  as,  in  two 
senses,  the  longest  engagement  on  record,  is  not 
very  clear;  but  its  mythological  interpretation  ap- 
pears fairly  obvious.  In  Gwyn,  god  of  death  and 
the  underworld,  and  in  the  solar  deity,  Gwyrthur, 
we  may  see  the  powers  of  darkness  and  sunshine, 
of  winter  and  summer,  in  contest,^  each  alternately 
winning  and  losing  a  bride  who  would  seem  to 
represent  the  spring  with  its  grain  and  flowers. 
Creudylad,  whom  the  story  of  ''  Kulhwch  and 
Olwen"  calls  **the  most  splendid  maiden  in  the 
three  islands  of  the  mighty  and  in  the  three  islands 
adjacent",  is,  in  fact,  the  British  Persephone.  As 
the  daughter  of  Lludd,  she  is  child  of  the  shining 
sky.  But  a  different  tradition  must  have  made 
her  a  daughter  of  Llyr,  the  sea-god;  for  her  name 
as  such  passed,  through  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth, 
to  Shakespeare,  in  whose  hands  she  became  that 
pathetic  figure,  Cordelia  in  "  King  Lear".  It  may 
not  be  altogether  unworthy  of  notice,  though  per- 
haps it  is  only  a  coincidence,  that  in  some  myths 

»  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  561.  ^  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  561-563. 


26o         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  Greek  Persephon6  is  made  a  daughter  of  Zeus 
and  in  others  of  Poseidon.^ 

Turning  from  the  sky-god  and  his  son,  we  find 
others  of  Don  s  children  to  have  been  the  exponents 
of  those  arts  of  life  which  early  races  held  to  have 
been  taught  directly  by  the  gods  to  men.  Don 
herself  had  a  brother,  Math,  son  of  a  mysterious 
Mathonwy,  and  recognizable  as  a  benevolent  ruler 
of  the  underworld  akin  to  Beli,  or  perhaps  that  god 
himself  under  another  title,  for  the  name  Math, 
which  means  **  coin,  money,  treasure  ",^  recalls  that 
of  Plouton,  the  Greek  god  of  Hades,  in  his  guise 
of  possessor  and  giver  of  metals.  It  was  a  belief 
common  to  the  Aryan  races  that  wisdom,  as  well  as 
wealth,  came  originally  from  the  underworld;  and 
we  find  Mdth  represented,  in  the  Mabinogi  bearing 
his  name,  as  handing  on  his  magical  lore  to  his 
nephew  and  pupil  Gwydion,  who,  there  is  good 
reason  to  believe,  was  the  same  divine  personage 
whom  the  Teutonic  tribes  worshipped  as  **  Woden  " 
and  **  Odin ".  Thus  equipped,  Gwydion  son  of 
Don  became  the  druid  of  the  gods,  the  **  master 
of  illusion  and  phantasy",  and,  not  only  that,  but 


1  Dyer :  Studies  of  the  Gods  in  Greece,  p.  48. 

Gwyn,  son  of  Nudd,  had  a  brother,  Edeyrn,  of  whom  so  little  has  come  down  to 
us  that  he  finds  his  most  suitable  place  in  a  foot-note.  Unmentioned  in  the  earliest 
Welsh  legends,  he  first  appears  as  a  knight  of  Arthur's  court  in  the  Red  Book  stories 
of  "  Kulhwch  and  Olwen",  the  "  Dream  of  Rhonabwy",  and  "Geraint,  the  Son  of 
Erbin".  He  accompanied  Arthur  on  his  expedition  to  Rome,  and  is  said  also  to  have 
slain  "three  most  atrocious  giants"  at  Brentenol  (Brent  Knoll),  near  Glastonbury. 
His  name  occurs  in  a  catalogue  of  Welsh  saints,  where  he  is  described  as  a  bard, 
and  the  chapel  of  Bodedym,  near  Holyhead,  still  stands  to  his  honour.  Modern 
readers  will  know  him  from  Tennyson's  Idyll  of  "Geraint  and  Enid",  which 
follows  very  closely  the  Welsh  romance  of  "Geraint,  the  Son  of  Erbin". 

2  Rhys — who  calls  him  "a  Cambrian  Pluto":  Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology, 
p.  414. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  261 

the  teacher  of  all  that  is  useful  and  good,  the  friend 
and  helper  of  mankind,  and  the  perpetual  fighter 
against  niggardly  underworld  powers  for  the  good 
gifts  which  they  refused  to  allow  out  of  their  keep- 
ing. Shoulder  to  shoulder  with  him  in  this  **holy 
war  "  of  culture  against  ignorance,  and  light  against 
darkness,  stood  his  brothers  Amaethon,  god  of  agri- 
culture, and  Govannan,  a  god  of  smithcraft  identical 
with  the  Gaelic  Giobniu.  He  had  also  a  sister 
called  Arianrod,  or  '*  Silver  Circle  ",  who,  as  is  com- 
mon in  mythologies,  was  not  only  his  sister,  but 
also  his  wife.  So  Zeus  wedded  Her6;  and,  indeed, 
it  is  difficult  to  say  where  otherwise  the  partners  of 
gods  are  to  come  from.  Of  this  connection  two 
sons  were  born  at  one  birth — Dylan  and  Lieu,  who 
are  considered  as  representing  the  twin  powers  of 
darkness  and  light.  With  darkness  the  sea  was 
inseparably  connected  by  the  Celts,  and,  as  soon  as 
the  dark  twin  was  born  and  named,  he  plunged 
headlong  into  his  native  element.  **  And  imme- 
diately when  he  was  in  the  sea,"  says  the  Mabinogi 
of  Math,  son  of  Mithonwy,  **he  took  its  nature, 
and,  swam  as  well  as  the  best  fish  that  was  therein. 
And  for  that  reason  was  he  called  Dylan,  the  Son 
of  the  Wave.  Beneath  him  no  wave  ever  broke." 
He  was  killed  with  a  spear  at  last  by  his  uncle, 
Govannan,  and,  according  to  the  bard  Taliesin,  the 
waves  of  Britain,  Ireland,  Scotland,  and  the  Isle  of 
Man  wept  for  him.^  Beautiful  legends  grew  up 
around  his  death.     The  clamour  of  the  waves  dash- 

1  Book  of  Taliesin,  XLIII.     The  Death-song  of  Dylan,  Son  of  the  Wave,  Vol.  I, 
p.  288  of  Skene. 


262         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

ing  upon  the  beach  is  the  expression  of  their  longing 
to  avenge  their  son.  The  sound  of  the  sea  rushing 
up  the  mouth  of  the  River  Conway  is  still  known  as 
**  Dylan's  death-groan  "\  A  small  promontory  on 
the  Carnarvonshire  side  of  the  Menai  Straits,  called 
Pwynt  Maen  Tylen,  or  Pwynt  Maen  Dulan,  pre- 
serves his  name.^ 

The  other  child  of  Gwydion  and  Arianrod  grew 
up  to  become  the  British  sun-god,  Lieu  Llaw 
Gyffes,  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  Gaelic  Lugh 
Lamh-fada,  '*  Light  the  Long-handed".  Like  all 
solar  deities,  his  growth  was  rapid.  When  he 
was  a  year  old,  he  seemed  to  be  two  years;  at 
the  age  of  two,  he  travelled  by  himself;  and 
when  he  was  four  years  old,  he  was  as  tall  as 
a  boy  of  eight,  and  was  his  father's  constant  com- 
panion. 

One  day,  Gwydion  took  him  to  the  castle  of 
Arianrod — not  her  castle  in  the  sky,  but  her  abode 
on  earth,  the  still  -  remembered  site  of  which  is 
marked  by  a  patch  of  rocks  in  the  Menai  Straits, 
accessible  without  a  boat  only  during  the  lowest 
spring  and  autumn  tides.  Arianrod  had  disowned 
her  son,  and  did  not  recognize  him  when  she  saw 
him  with  Gwydion.  She  asked  who  he  was,  and 
was  much  displeased  when  told.  She  demanded  to 
know  his  name,  and,  when  Gwydion  replied  that  he 
had  as  yet  received  none,  she  "  laid  a  destiny  upon  " 
him,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Celts,  that  he  should  be 
without  a  name  until  she  chose  to  bestow  one  on 
him  herself. 

1  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  387.  *  Rhys :  Celtic  Folklore,  p.  210. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  263 

To  be  without  a  name  was  a  very  serious  thing 
to  the  ancient  Britons,  who  seem  to  have  held  the 
primitive  theory  that  the  name  and  the  soul  are  the 
same.  So  Gwydion  cast  about  to  think  by  what 
craft  he  might  extort  from  Arianrod  some  remark 
from  which  he  could  name  their  son.  The  next  day, 
he  went  down  to  the  sea-shore  with  the  boy,  both  of 
them  disguised  as  cordwainers.  He  made  a  boat 
out  of  sea-weed  by  magic,  and  some  beautifully- 
coloured  leather  out  of  some  dry  sticks  and  sedges. 
Then  they  sailed  the  boat  to  the  port  of  Arianrod's 
castle,  and,  anchoring  it  where  it  could  be  seen, 
began  ostentatiously  to  stitch  away  at  the  leather. 
Naturally,  they  were  soon  noticed,  and  Arianrod 
sent  someone  out  to  see  who  they  were  and  what 
they  were  doing.  When  she  found  that  they  were 
shoemakers,  she  remembered  that  she  wanted  some 
shoes.  Gwydion,  though  he  had  her  measure,  pur- 
posely made  them,  first  too  large,  and  then  too 
small.  This  brought  Arianrod  herself  down  to  the 
boat  to  be  fitted. 

While  Gwydion  was  measuring  Arianrod's  foot 
for  the  shoes,  a  wren  came  and  stood  upon  the  deck. 
The  boy  took  his  bow  and  arrow,  and  hit  the  wren 
in  the  leg  —  a  favourite  shot  of  Celtic  ** crack" 
archers,  at  any  rate  in  romance.  The  goddess  was 
pleased  to  be  amiable  and  complimentary.  **  Truly," 
said  she,  *'the  lion  aimed  at  it  with  a  steady  hand." 
It  is  from  such  incidents  that  primitive  people  take 
their  names,  all  the  world  over.  The  boy  had  got 
his.  *'  It  is  no  thanks  to  you,"  said  Gwydion  to 
Arianrod,  *'but  now  he  has  a  name.     And  a  good 


264         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

name  it  is.     He  shall  be  called  Llew  Llaw  Gyffes\" 

This  name  of  the  sun-god  is  a  good  example  of 
how  obsolete  the  ancient  pagan  tradition  had  be- 
come before  it  was  put  into  writing.  The  old  word 
LleUy  meaning  **  light ",  had  passed  out  of  use,  and 
the  scribe  substituted  for  a  name  that  was  unintelli- 
gible to  him  one  like  it  which  he  knew,  namely  LleWy 
meaning  **  lion ".  The  word  Gyffes  seems  also  to 
have  suffered  change,  and  to  have  meant  originally 
not  *' steady",  but  "long "I 

At  any  rate,  Arianrod  was  defeated  in  her  design 
to  keep  her  son  nameless.  Neither  did  she  even 
get  her  shoes;  for,  as  soon  as  he  had  gained  his 
object,  Gwydion  allowed  the  boat  to  change  back 
into  sea-weed,  and  the  leather  to  return  to  sedge  and 
sticks.  So,  in  her  anger,  she  put  a  fresh  destiny  on 
the  boy,  that  he  should  not  take  arms  till  she  herself 
gave  them  him. 

Gwydion,  however,  took  Lieu  to  Dinas  Dinllev, 
his  castle,  which  still  stands  at  the  edge  of  the 
Menai  Straits,  and  brought  him  up  as  a  warrior. 
As  soon  as  he  thought  him  old  enough  to  have 
arms,  he  took  him  with  him  again  to  Caer  Arianrod. 
This  time,  they  were  disguised  as  bards.  Arianrod 
received  them  gladly,  heard  Gwydion's  songs  and 
tales,  feasted  them,  and  prepared  a  room  for  them 
to  sleep  in. 

The  next  morning,  Gwydion  got  up  very  early, 
and  prepared  his  most  powerful  incantations.  By 
his  druidical  arts  he  made  it  seem  as  if  the  whole 


*  i.e.  The  Lion  with  the  Steady  Hand. 
'See  Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  note  to  p.  237. 


THE    MAKING    OF    BLODliUWEDD 

After  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacou,  A.R.A. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  265 

country  rang  with  the  shouts  and  trumpets  of  an 
army,  and  he  put  a  glamour  over  everyone,  so  that 
they  saw  the  bay  filled  with  ships.  Arianrod  came 
to  him  in  terror,  asking  what  could  be  done  to 
protect  the  castle.  **Give  us  arms,"  he  replied, 
"and  we  will  do  the  best  we  can."  So  Arianrod s 
maidens  armed  Gwydion,  while  Arianrod  herself 
put  arms  on  Lieu.  By  the  time  she  had  finished,  all 
the  noises  had  ceased,  and  the  ships  had  vanished. 
"Let  us  take  our  arms  off  again,"  said  Gwydion; 
"  we  shall  not  need  them  now."  "  But  the  army 
is  all  round  the  castle!"  cried  Arianrod.  "There 
was  no  army,"  answered  Gwydion;  "it  was  only  an 
illusion  of  mine  to  cause  you  to  break  your  prophecy 
and  give  our  son  arms.  And  now  he  has  got  them, 
without  thanks  to  you."  "Then  I  will  lay  a  worse 
destiny  on  him,"  cried  the  infuriated  goddess.  "He 
shall  never  have  a  wife  of  the  people  of  this  earth." 
"He  shall  have  a  wife  in  spite  of  you,"  said 
Gwydion. 

So  Gwydion  went  to  Math,  his  uncle  and  tutor  in 
magic,  and  between  them  they  made  a  woman  out 
of  flowers  by  charms  and  illusion.  "  They  took  the 
blossoms  of  the  oak,  and  the  blossoms  of  the  broom, 
and  the  blossoms  of  the  meadow-sweet,  and  pro- 
duced from  them  a  maiden,  the  fairest  and  most 
graceful  that  man  ever  saw."  They  called  her  Blo- 
deuwedd  (Flower-face),  and  gave  her  to  Lieu  as  his 
wife.  And  they  gave  Lieu  a  palace  called  Mur  y 
Castell,  near  Bala  Lake. 

All  went  well  until,  one  day,  Gronw  Pebyr,  one 
of  the  gods  of  darkness,   came    by,   hunting,   and 


266         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

killed  the  stag  at  nightfall  near  Lleu's  castle.  The 
sun-god  was  away  upon  a  visit  to  Math,  but  Blodeu- 
wedd  asked  the  stranger  to  take  shelter  with  her. 
That  night  they  fell  in  love  with  one  another,  and 
conspired  together  how  Lieu  might  be  put  away. 
When  Lieu  came  back  from  Math's  court,  Blodeu- 
wedd,  like  a  Celtic  Dalilah,  wormed  out  of  him  the 
secret  of  how  his  life  was  preserved.  He  told  her 
that  he  could  only  die  in  one  way;  he  could  not  be 
killed  either  inside  or  outside  a  house,  either  on 
horseback  or  on  foot,  but  that  if  a  spear  that  had 
been  a  year  in  the  making,  and  which  was  never 
worked  upon  except  during  the  sacrifice  on  Sunday, 
were  to  be  cast  at  him  as  he  stood  beneath  a  roof  of 
thatch,  after  having  just  bathed,  with  one  foot  upon 
the  edge  of  the  bath  and  the  other  upon  a  buck 
goat  s  back,  it  would  cause  his  death.  Blodeuwedd 
piously  thanked  Heaven  that  he  was  so  well  pro- 
tected, and  sent  a  messenger  to  her  paramour,  telling 
him  what  she  had  learned.  Gronw  set  to  work  on 
the  spear;  and  in  a  year  it  was  ready.  When  she 
knew  this,  Blodeuwedd  asked  Lieu  to  show  her 
exactly  how  it  was  he  could  be  killed. 

Lieu  agreed;  and  Blodeuwedd  prepared  the  bath 
under  the  thatched  roof,  and  tethered  the  goat  by  it. 
Lieu  bathed,  and  then  stood  with  one  foot  upon  the 
edge  of  the  bath,  and  the  other  upon  the  goat's  back. 
At  this  moment,  Gronw,  from  an  ambush,  flung  the 
spear,  and  hit  Lieu,  who,  with  a  terrible  cry,  changed 
into  an  eagle,  and  flew  away.  He  never  came  back; 
and  Gronw  took  possession  of  both  his  wife  and  his 
palace. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  267 

But  Gwydion  set  out  to  search  everywhere  for  his 
son.  At  last,  one  day,  he  came  to  a  house  in  North 
Wales  where  the  man  was  in  great  anxiety  about 
his  sow;  for  as  soon  as  the  sty  was  opened,  every 
morning,  she  rushed  out,  and  did  not  return  again 
till  late  in  the  evening.  Gwydion  offered  to  follow 
her,  and,  at  dawn,  the  man  took  him  to  the  sty,  and 
opened  the  door.  The  sow  leaped  forth,  and  ran, 
and  Gwydion  ran  after  her.  He  tracked  her  to 
a  brook  between  Snowdon  and  the  sea,  still  called 
Nant  y  Llew,  and  saw  her  feeding  underneath  an 
oak.  Upon  the  top  of  the  tree  there  was  an  eagle, 
and,  every  time  it  shook  itself,  there  fell  off  it  lumps 
of  putrid  meat,  which  the  sow  ate  greedily.  Gwydion 
suspected  that  the  eagle  must  be  Lieu.  So  he  sang 
this  verse: 

"  Oak  that  grows  between  the  two  banks; 
Darkened  is  the  sky  and  hill ! 
Shall  I  not  tell  him  by  his  wounds, 
That  this  is  Lieu?" 

The  eagle,  on  hearing  this,  came  half-way  down  the 
tree.     So  Gwydion  sang: 

"  Oak  that  grows  in  upland  ground, 
Is  it  not  wetted  by  the  rain?     Has  it  not  been  drenched 
By  nine  score  tempests? 
It  bears  in  its  branches  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes." 

The  eagle  came  slowly  down  until  it  was  on  the 
lowest  branch.      Gwydion  sang: 

"  Oak  that  grows  beneath  the  steep ; 
Stately  and  majestic  is  its  aspect! 
Shall  I  not  speak  it? 
That  Lieu  will  come  to  my  lap?" 


268         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Then  the  eagle  came  down,  and  sat  on  Gwydlon's 
knee.  Gwydion  struck  it  with  his  magic  wand,  and 
it  became  Lieu  again,  wasted  to  skin  and  bone  by 
the  poison  on  the  spear. 

Gwydion  took  him  to  Mith  to  be  healed,  and  left 
him  there,  while  he  went  to  Mur  y  Castell,  where 
Blodeuwedd  was.  When  she  heard  that  he  was 
coming,  she  fled.  But  Gwydion  overtook  her,  and 
changed  her  into  an  owl,  the  bird  that  hates  the 
day.  A  still  older  form  of  this  probably  extremely 
ancient  myth  of  the  sun-god — the  savage  and  repul- 
sive details  of  which  speak  of  a  hoary  antiquity — 
makes  the  chase  of  Blodeuwedd  by  Gwydion  to  have 
taken  place  in  the  sky,  the  stars  scattered  over  the 
Milky  Way  being  the  traces  of  it.^  As  for  her 
accomplice,  Lieu  would  accept  no  satisfaction  short 
of  Gronw  s  submitting  to  stand  exactly  where  Lieu 
had  stood,  to  be  shot  at  in  his  turn.  To  this  he  was 
obliged  to  agree;  and  Lieu  killed  him.^ 

There  are  two  other  sons  of  Beli  and  Don  of 
whom  so  little  is  recorded  that  it  would  hardly  be 
worth  while  mentioning  them,  were  it  not  for  the 
wild  poetry  of  the  legend  connected  with  them. 
The  tale,  put  into  writing  at  a  time  when  all  the 
gods  were  being  transfigured  into  simple  mortals, 
tells  us  that  they  were  two  kings  of  Britain,  brothers. 
One  starlight  night  they  were  walking  together. 
''See,"  said  Nynniaw  to  Peibaw,  ''what  a  fine, 
wide-spreading  field  I  have."    "Where  is  it?"  asked 


1  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures ^  p.  240. 

*  Retold  from  the  Mabinogi  of  Math,  Son  of  Mathonwy,  in  Lady  Guest's  Mabin- 
ogion. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  269 

Peibaw.  '*  There,"  replied  Nynniaw;  *'the  whole 
stretch  of  the  sky,  as  far  as  the  eye  reaches."  **  Look 
then,"  returned  Peibaw,  ''what  a  number  of  cattle 
I  have  grazing  on  your  field."  ''Where  are  they?" 
asked  Nynniaw.  "All  the  stars  that  you  can  see," 
replied  Peibaw,  "  every  one  of  them  of  fiery-coloured 
gold,  with  the  moon  for  a  shepherd  over  them." 
"They  shall  not  feed  on  my  field,"  cried  Nynniaw. 
"  They  shall,"  exclaimed  Peibaw.  "  They  shall  not," 
cried  Nynniaw,  "  They  shall,"  said  Peibaw.  "  They 
shall  not,"  Nynniaw  answered;  and  so  they  went 
on,  from  contradiction  to  quarrel,  and  from  private 
quarrel  to  civil  war,  until  the  armies  of  both  of  them 
were  destroyed,  and  the  two  authors  of  the  evil  were 
turned  by  God  into  oxen  for  their  sins.^ 

Last  of  the  children  of  Don,  we  find  a  goddess 
called  Penardun,  of  whom  little  is  known  except 
that  she  was  married  to  the  sea-god  Llyr.  This 
incident  is  curious,  as  forming  a  parallel  to  the 
Gaelic  story  which  tells  of  intermarriage  between  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  and  the  Fomors.^  Brigit,  the 
Dagda's  daughter,  was  married  to  Bress,  son  of 
Elathan,  while  Cian,  the  son  of  Diancecht,  wedded 
Ethniu,  the  daughter  of  Balor.  So,  in  this  kindred 
mythology,  a  slender  tie  of  relationship  binds  the 
gods  of  the  sky  to  the  gods  of  the  sea. 

The  name  Llyr  is  supposed,  like  its  Irish  equiva- 
lent Ler,  to  have  meant  "the  Sea".^  The  British 
sea-god  is  undoubtedly  the  same  as  the  Gaelic;  in- 

1  The  lolo  Manuscripts :  collected  by  Edward  Williams,  the  bard,  at  about  the 
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century — The  Tale  of  Rhitta  Gawr. 
a  See  Chapter  VII—"  The  Rise  of  the  Sun-God". 
•  Rhys:  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  130. 


270         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

deed,  the  two  facts  that  he  is  described  in  Welsh 
literature  as  Llyr  Llediath,  that  is,  *'  Llyr  of  the 
Foreign  Dialect",  and  is  given  a  wife  called  Iweridd 
(Ireland)^  suggest  that  he  may  have  been  borrowed 
by  the  Britons  from  the  Gaels  later  than  any  myth- 
ology common  to  both.  As  a  British  god,  he  was 
the  far-off  original  of  Shakespeare's  ''  King  Lear". 
The  chief  city  of  his  worship  is  still  called  after  him, 
Leicester,  that  is,  Llyr-cestre,  in  still  earlier  days, 
Caer  Llyr. 

Llyr,  we  have  noticed,  married  two  wives,  Pen- 
ardun  and  Iweridd.  By  the  daughter  of  Don  he 
had  a  son  called  Manawyddan,  who  is  identical 
with  the  Gaelic  Mananndn  mac  Lir.^  We  know 
less  of  his  character  and  attributes  than  we  do  of  the 
Irish  god;  but  we  find  him  equally  a  ruler  in  that 
Hades  or  Elysium  which  the  Celtic  mind  ever  con- 
nected with  the  sea.  Like  all  the  inhabitants,  of 
that  other  world,  he  is  at  once  a  master  of  magic 
and  of  the  useful  arts,  which  he  taught  willingly  to 
his  friends.  To  his  enemies,  however,  he  could 
show  a  different  side  of  his  character.  A  triad  tells 
us  that — 

"  The  achievement  of  Manawyddan  the  Wise, 

After  lamentation  and  fiery  wrath. 

Was  the  constructing  of  the  bone-fortress  of  Oeth  and 
Anoeth",3 

which  is  described  as  a  prison  made,  in  the  shape  of 

1  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  130. 

^  The  old  Irish  tract  called  Coir  Antnann  (the  Choice  of  Names)  says:  "Man- 
annan  mac  Lir  .  .  .  the  Britons  and  the  men  of  Erin  deemed  that  he  was  the  god 
of  the  sea". 

3  lolo  MSS.,  stanza  18  of  The  Stanzas  of  the  Achievements,  composed  by  the 
Azure  Bard  of  the  Chair. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  271 

a  bee-hive,  entirely  of  human  bones  mortared  to- 
gether, and  divided  into  innumerable  cells,  forming  a 
kind  of  labyrinth.  In  this  ghastly  place  he  immured 
those  whom  he  found  trespassing  in  Hades;  and 
among  his  captives  was  no  less  a  person  than  the 
famous  Arthur.^ 

'*  Ireland"  bore  two  children  to  Llyr:  a  daughter 
called  Branwen  and  a  son  called  Bran.  The  little 
we  know  of  Branwen  of  the  "Fair  Bosom"  shows 
her  as  a  goddess  of  love — child,  like  the  Greek 
Aphrodite,  of  the  sea.  Bran,  on  the  other  hand, 
is,  even  more  clearly  than  Manawyddan,  a  dark 
deity  of  Hades.  He  is  represented  as  of  colossal 
size,  so  huge,  in  fact,  that  no  house  or  ship  was  big 
enough  to  hold  him.^  He  delighted  in  batde  and 
carnage,  like  the  hoodie-crow  or  raven  from  which 
he  probably  took  his  name,^  but  he  was  also  the 
especial  patron  of  bards,  minstrels,  and  musicians, 
and  we  find  him  in  one  of  the  poems  ascribed  to 
Taliesin  claiming  to  be  himself  a  bard,  a  harper, 
a  player  on  the  crowth,  and  seven  -  score  other 
musicians  all  at  once.*  His  son  was.  called  Cara- 
dawc  the  Strong-armed,  who,  as  the  British  myth- 
ology crumbled,  became  confounded  with  the  his- 
torical Caratacus,  known  popularly  as  **Caractacus". 

Both  Bran  and  Manawyddan  were  especially  con- 
nected with  the  Swansea  peninsula.  The  bone- 
fortress  of  Oeth  and  Anoeth  was  placed  by  tradition  in 

1  See  note  to  chap,  xxii— "  The  Treasures  of  Britain". 
^  Mabinogi  of  Branwen,  Daughter  of  Llyr. 
'  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  245. 

*  Book  of  Taliesin,  poem  XLViii,  in  Skene's  Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,  Vol  I 
p.  297. 


272  Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Gower.^  That  Brin  was  equally  at  home  there  may 
be  proved  from  the  Morte  Darthur,  in  which  store- 
house of  forgotten  and  misunderstood  mythology 
Br4n  of  Gower  survives  as  **  King  Brandegore".^ 
Such  identification  of  a  mere  mortal  country  with 
the  other  world  seems  strange  enough  to  us,  but  to 
our  Celtic  ancestors  it  was  a  quite  natural  thought. 
All  islands — and  peninsulas,  which,  viewed  from  an 
opposite  coast,  probably  seemed  to  them  islands — 
were  deemed  to  be  pre-eminently  homes  of  the  dark 
Powers  of  Hades.  Difficult  of  access,  protected  by 
the  turbulent  and  dangerous  sea,  sometimes  rendered 
quite  invisible  by  fogs  and  mists  and,  at  other  times, 
looming  up  ghostlily  on  the  horizon,  often  held  by 
the  remnant  of  a  hostile  lower  race,  they  gained  a 
mystery  and  a  sanctity  from  the  law  of  the  human 
mind  which  has  always  held  the  unknown  to  be  the 
terrible.  The  Cornish  Britons,  gazing  from  the 
shore,  saw  Gower  and  Lundy,  and  deemed  them 
outposts  of  the  over-sea  Other  World.  To  the 
Britons  of  Wales,  Ireland  was.  no  human  realm,  a 
view  reciprocated  by  the  Gaels,  who  saw  Hades 
in  Britain,  while  the  Isle  of  Man  was  a  little  Hades 
common  to  them  both.  Nor  even  was  the  sea 
always  necessary  to  sunder  the  world  of  ghosts 
from  that  of  ** shadow-casting  men".  Glastonbury 
Tor,  surrounded  by  almost  impassable  swamps,  was 
one  of  the  especial  haunts  of  Gwyn  ap  Nudd.  The 
Britons  of  the  north  held  that  beyond  the  Roman 


^  The  Verses  of  the  Graves  of  the  Warriors ^  in  the  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen. 
See  also  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend^  p.  347. 

^  Rhvs:  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Le^end^  p.  16a 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  273 

wall  and  the  vast  Caledonian  wood  lived  ghosts 
and  not  men.  Even  the  Roman  province  of  De- 
metia — called  by  the  Welsh  Dyfed,  and  correspond- 
ing, roughly,  to  the  modern  County  of  Pembroke- 
shire— was,  as  a  last  stronghold  of  the  aborigines, 
identified  with  the  mythic  underworld. 

As  such,  Dyfed  was  ruled  by  a  local  tribe  of 
gods,  whose  greatest  figures  were  Pwyll,  **  Head 
of  Annwn  "  (the  Welsh  name  for  Hades),  with  his 
wife  Rhiannon,  and  their  son  Pryderi.  These 
beings  are  described  as  hostile  to  the  children  of 
Don,  but  friendly  to  the  race  of  Llyr.  After 
Pwyll's  death  or  disappearance,  his  widow  Rhiannon 
becomes  the  wife  of  Manawyddan.^  In  a  poem 
of  Taliesin's  we  find  Manawyddan  and  Pryderi  joint- 
rulers  of  Hades,  and  warders  of  that  magic  cauldron 
of  inspiration  ^  which  the  gods  of  light  attempted  to 
steal  or  capture,  and  which  became  famous  after- 
wards as  the  **  Holy  Grail ".  Another  of  their 
treasures  were  the  *'  Three  Birds  of  Rhiannon ", 
which,  we  are  told  in  an  ancient  book,  could  sing 
the  dead  to  life  and  the  living  into  the  sleep  of 
death.  Fortunately  they  sang  seldom.  **  There 
are  three  things,"  says  a  Welsh  triad,  ''which  are 
not  often  heard :  the  song  of  the  birds  of  Rhiannon, 
a  song  of  wisdom  from  the  mouth  of  a  Saxon,  and 
an  invitation  to  a  feast  from  a  miser." 

Nor  is  the  list  of  British  gods  complete  with- 
out mention  of  Arthur,  though  most  readers  will 
be  surprised  to  find  him  in  such  company.      The 

1  Mabinogi  of  Manawyddan,  Son  of  Llyr. 

2  Book  of  Taliesin,  poem  xiv,  Vol.  I,  p,  276,  of  Skene. 
(B219)  S 


274         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

genius  of  Tennyson,  who  drew  his  materials  mostly 
from  the  Norman- French  romances,  has  stereotyped 
the  popular  conception  of  Arthur  as  a  king  of  early 
Britain  who  fought  for  his  fatherland  and  the  Chris- 
tian faith  against  invading  Saxons.  Possibly  there 
may,  indeed,  have  been  a  powerful  British  chieftain 
bearing  that  typically  Celtic  name,  which  is  found  in 
Irish  legend  as  Artur,  one  of  the  sons  of  Nemed  who 
fought  against  the  Fomors,  and  on  the  Continent 
as  Artaius,  a  Gaulish  deity  whom  the  Romans  identi- 
fied with  Mercury,  and  who  seems  to  have  been 
a  patron  of  agriculture/  But  the  original  Arthur 
stands  upon  the  same  ground  as  Cuchulainn  and 
Finn.  His  deeds  are  mythical,  because  super- 
human. His  companions  can  be  shown  to  have 
been  divine.  Some  we  know  were  worshipped  in 
Gaul.  Others  are  children  of  Don,  of  Llyr,  and 
of  Pwyll,  dynasties  of  older  gods  to  whose  head 
Arthur  seems  to  have  risen,  as  his  cult  waxed  and 
theirs  waned.  Stripped  of  their  godhead,  and 
strangely  transformed,  they  fill  the  pages  of  ro- 
mance as  Knights  of  the  Table  Round. 

These  deities  were  the  native  gods  of  Britain. 
Many  others  are,  however,  mentioned  upon  inscrip- 
tions found  in  our  island,  but  these  were  almost 
all  exotic  and  imported.  Imperial  Rome  brought 
men  of  diverse  races  among  her  legions,  and  these 
men  brought  their  gods.  Scattered  over  Britain, 
but  especially  in  the  north,  near  the  Wall,  we  find 
evidence  that  deities  of  many  nations — from  Ger- 
many to  Africa,   and  from   Gaul  to   Persia — were 

^  Rhys:  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  48  and  note. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  275 

sporadically  worshipped.^  Most  of  these  foreign 
gods  were  Roman,  but  a  temple  at  Eboracum  (now 
York)  was  dedicated  to  Serapis,  and  Mithras,  the 
Persian  sun-god,  was  also  adored  there;  while  at 
Corbridge,  in  Northumberland  (the  ancient  Cor- 
spitium),  there  have  been  found  altars  to  the  Tyrian 
Hercules  and  to  Astarte.  The  war-god  was  also 
invoked  under  many  strange  names — as  "  Cocidius  " 
by  a  colony  of  Dacians  in  Cumberland ;  as  Toutates, 
Camulus,  Coritiacus,  Belatucador,  Alator,  Loucetius, 
Condates,  and  Rigisamos  by  men  of  different  coun- 
tries. A  goddess  of  war  was  worshipped  at  Bath 
under  the  name  of  Nemetona.  The  hot  springs 
of  the  same  town  were  under  the  patronage  of  a 
divinity  called  Sul,  identified  by  the  Romans  with 
Minerva,  and  she  was  helped  by  a  god  of  medicine 
described  on  a  dedicatory  tablet  as  *'  Sol  Apollo 
Anicetus  ".  Few  of  these  **  strange  gods",  however, 
seem  to  have  taken  hold  of  the  imagination  of  the 
native  Britons.  Their  worshippers  did  not  prose- 
lytize, and  their  general  influence  was  probably 
about  equal  to  that  of  an  Evangelical  Church  in 
a  Turkish  town.  The  sole  exceptions  to  this  rule 
are  where  the  foreign  gods  are  Gaulish;  but  in 
several  instances  it  can  be  proved  that  they  were 
not  so  much  of  Roman,  as  of  original  Celtic 
importation.  The  warlike  heaven  -  god  Camulus 
appears  in  Gaelic  heroic  myth  as  Cumhal,  the 
father  of  Finn,  and  in  British  mythical  history  as 
Coel,   a   duke  of  Caer  Coelvin  (known  earlier  as 

iSee  a  paper  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  for  July,   1851 — "The   Romans  in 
Britain  ". 


276         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Camulodunum,  and  now  as  Colchester),  who  seized 
the  crown  of  Britain,  and  spent  his  short  reign 
in  a  series  of  battles.^  The  name  of  the  sun  - 
god  Maponos  is  found  alike  upon  altars  in  Gaul 
and  Britain,  and  in  Welsh  literature  as  Mabon,  a 
follower  of  Arthur;  while  another  Gaulish  sun-god, 
Belinus,  who  had  a  splendid  temple  at  Bajocassos 
(the  modern  Bayeux),  though  not  mentioned  in  the 
earliest  British  mythology,  as  its  scattered  records 
have  come  down  to  us,  must  have  been  con- 
nected with  Bran,  for  we  find  in  Geoffrey  of  Mon- 
mouth's History  ''  King  Belinus "  as  brother  of 
**  King  Brennius  ",^  and  in  the  Morte  Darthur 
**  Balin  "  as  brother  of  **  Balan  ".^  A  second-century 
Greek  writer  gives  an  account  of  a  god  of  eloquence 
worshipped  in  Gaul  under  the  name  of  Ogmios,  and 
represented  as  equipped  like  Heracles,  a  description 
which  exactly  corresponds  to  the  conception  of  the 
Gaelic  Ogma,  at  once  patron  of  literature  and  writ- 
ing and  professional  strong  man  of  the  Tuatha  D^ 
Danann.  Nemetona,  the  war-goddess  worshipped 
at  Bath,  was  probably  the  same  as  Nemon,  one  of 
Nuadas  Valkyr -wives,  while  a  broken  inscription 
to  athubodva,  which  probably  stood,  when  intact, 
for  Cathubodva,  may  well  have  been  addressed  to 
the  Gaulish  equivalent  of  Badb  Catha,  the  **  War- 
fury".  Lugh,  or  Lieu,  was  also  widely  known  on 
the  Continent  as  Lugus.     Three  important  towns — 


1  It  is  said  that  the  '*  Old  King  Cole"  of  the  popular  ballad,  who  "  was  a  merry 
old  soul ",  represents  the  last  faint  tradition  of  the  Celtic  god. 

*  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  Book  III,  chap.  I. 

•  Morte  Darthur,  Book  I,  chap.  xvi. 


The  Gods  of  the  Britons  277 

Laon,  Leyden,  and  Lyons — were  all  anciently  called 
after  him  Lugu-dunum  (Lugus'  town),  and  at  the 
last  and  greatest  of  these  a  festival  was  still  held 
in  Roman  times  upon  the  sun-god's  day — the  first 
of  August — which  corresponded  to  the  Lugnassad 
(Lugh's  commemoration)  held  in  ancient  Ireland. 
Brigit,  the  Gaelic  Minerva,  is  also  found  in  Britain 
as  Brigantia,  tutelary  goddess  of  the  Brigantes,  a 
Northern  tribe,  and  in  Eastern  France  as  Brigindo, 
to  whom  Iccavos,  son  of  Oppianos,  made  a  dedica- 
tory offering  of  which  there  is  still  record.^  v 

Other,  less  striking  agreements  between  the  myth- 
ical divine  names  of  the  Insular  and  Continental 
Celts  might  be  cited.  These  recorded  should,  how- 
ever, prove  sufficiently  that  Gaul,  Gael,  and  Briton 
shared  in  a  common  heritage  of  mythological  names 
and  ideas,  which  they  separately  developed  into 
three  superficially  different,  but  essentially  similar 
cults. 

1  For  full  account  of  Gaulish  gods,  and  their  Gaelic  and  British  affinities,  see 
Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  I  and  II — "The  Gaulish  Pantheon". 


CHAPTER   XVII 

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  THE  GODS  OF  HADES 

It  is  with  the  family  of  Pwyll,  deities  connected 
with  the  south-west  corner  of  Wales,  called  by  the 
Romans  Demetia,  and  by  the  Britons  Dyfed,  and, 
roughly  speaking,  identical  with  the  modern  county 
of  Pembrokeshire,  that  the  earliest  consecutive 
accounts  of  the  British  gods  begin.  The  first  of 
the  Four  Branches  of  the  Mabinogi  tell  us  how 
**  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed ",  gained  the  right  to  be 
called  Pen  Annwn,  the  **  Head  of  Hades  ".  Indeed, 
it  almost  seems  as  if  it  had  been  deliberately  written 
to  explain  how  the  same  person  could  be  at  once  a 
mere  mortal  prince,  however  legendary,  and  a  ruler 
in  the  mystic  Other  World,  and  so  to  reconcile  two 
conflicting  traditions.^  But  to  an  earlier  age  than 
that  in  which  the  legend  was  put  into  a  literary 
shape,  such  forced  reconciliation  would  not  have 
been  needed;  for  the  two  legends  would  not  have 
been  considered  to  conflict.  When  Pwyll,  head  of 
Annwn,  was  a  mythic  person  whose  tradition  was 
still  alive,  the  unexplored,  rugged,  and  savage 
country  of  Dyfed,  populated  by  the  aboriginal 
Iberians  whom  the  Celt  had  driven  into  such  remote 
districts,   appeared   to   those  who   dwelt   upon   the 

1  Rhys:  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  282. 
278 


The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades    279 

eastern  side  of  its  dividing  river,  the  Tawe,  at  least  a 
dependency  of  Annwn,  if  not  that  weird  realm  itself. 
But,  as  men  grew  bolder,  the  frontier  was  crossed, 
and  Dyfed  entered  and  traversed,  and  found  to  be 
not  so  unlike  other  countries.  Its  inhabitants,  if 
not  of  Celtic  race,  were  yet  of  flesh  and  blood.  So 
that,  though  the  province  still  continued  to  bear  to  a 
late  date  the  names  of  the  '*  Land  of  Illusion  "  and 
the  **  Realm  of  Glamour 'V  it  was  no  longer  deemed 
to  be  Hades  itself.  That  fitful  and  shadowy  country 
had  folded  its  tents,  and  departed  over  or  under  seas. 

The  story  of  '*  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed ",^  tells  us 
how  there  was  war  in  Annwn  between  its  two  kings 
— or  between  two,  perhaps,  of  its  many  chieftains. 
Arawn  (** Silver-Tongue")  and  Havgan  (**  Summer- 
White")  each  coveted  the  dominions  of  the  other. 
In  the  continual  contests  between  them,  Arawn  was 
worsted,  and  in  despair  he  visited  the  upper  earth  to 
seek  for  a  mortal  ally. 

At  this  time  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed,  held  his 
court  at  Narberth.  He  had,  however,  left  his 
capital  upon  a  hunting  expedition  to  Glyn  Ctich, 
known  to-day  as  a  valley  upon  the  borders  of  the 
two  counties  of  Pembroke  and  Carmarthen.  Like 
so  many  kings  of  European  and  Oriental  romance, 
when  an  adventure  is  at  hand,  he  became  separated 
from  his  party,  and  was,  in  modern  parlance,  **  thrown 
out".  He  could,  however,  still  hear  the  music  of 
his  hounds,  and  was  listening  to  them,  when  he  also 

1  It  is  constantly  so-called  by  the  fourteenth-century  Welsh  poet,  Dafydd  ab 
Gwilym,  so  much  admired  by  George  Borrow. 

*  This  chapter  is  retold  from  Lady  Guest's  translation  of  the  Mabinogi  of  Pwyll, 
Prince  of  Dyfed. 


28o         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

distinguished  the  cry  of  another  pack  coming  towards 
him.  As  he  watched  and  listened,  a  stag  came  into 
view;  and  the  strange  hounds  pulled  it  down  almost 
at  his  feet.  At  first  Pwyll  hardly  looked  at  the 
stag,  he  was  so  taken  up  with  gazing  at  the  hounds, 
for  *'  of  all  the  hounds  that  he  had  seen  in  the  world, 
he  had  never  seen  any  that  were  like  unto  these. 
For  their  hair  was  of  a  brilliant  shining  white,  and 
their  ears  were  red;  and  as  the  whiteness  of  their 
bodies  shone,  so  did  the  redness  of  their  ears  glisten." 
They  were,  indeed,  though  Pwyll  does  not  seem  to 
have  known  it,  of  the  true  Hades  breed — the  snow- 
white,  red-eared  hounds  we  meet  in  Gaelic  legends, 
and  which  are  still  said  to  be  sometimes  heard  and 
seen  scouring  the  hills  of  Wales  by  night.  Seeing 
no  rider  with  the  hounds,  Pwyll  drove  them  away 
from  the  dead  stag,  and  called  up  his  own  pack  to  it. 

While  he  was  doing  this,  a  man  **upon  a  large, 
light-gray  steed,  with  a  hunting-horn  round  his  neck, 
and  clad  in  garments  of  gray  woollen  in  the  fashion 
of  a  hunting  garb  "  appeared,  and  rated  Pwyll  for 
his  unsportsmanlike  conduct.  **  Greater  discourtesy," 
said  he,  *'  I  never  saw  than  your  driving  away  my 
dogs  after  they  had  killed  the  stag,  and  calling  your 
own  to  it.  And  though  I  may  not  be  revenged 
upon  you  for  this,  I  swear  that  I  will  do  you  more 
damage  than  the  value  of  a  hundred  stags." 

Pwyll  expressed  his  contrition,  and,  asking  the 
new-comer's  name  and  rank,  offered  to  atone  for  his 
fault.  The  stranger  told  his  name — Arawn,  a  king 
of  Annwn — and  said  that  Pwyll  could  gain  his 
forgiveness  only  in  one  way,  by  going  to  Annwn 


The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades    281 

instead  of  him,  and  fighting  for  him  with  Havgan. 
Pwyll  agreed  to  do  this,  and  the  King  of  Hades  put 
his  own  semblance  upon  the  mortal  prince,  so  that 
not  a  person  in  Annwn — not  even  Arawn  s  own  wife 
— would  know  that  he  was  not  that  king.  He  led 
him  by  a  secret  path  into  Annwn,  and  left  him 
before  his  castle,  charging  him  to  return  to  the  place 
where  they  had  first  met,  at  the  end  of  a  year  from 
that  day.  On  the  other  hand,  Arawn  took  on 
Pwyll's  shape,  and  went  to  Narberth. 

No  one  in  Annwn  suspected  Pwyll  of  being  anyone 
else  than  their  king.  He  spent  the  year  in  ruling 
the  realm,  in  hunting,  minstrelsy,  and  feasting. 
Both  by  day  and  night,  he  had  the  company  of 
Arawn  s  wife,  the  most  beautiful  woman  he  had  ever 
yet  seen,  but  he  refrained  from  taking  advantage  of 
the  trust  placed  in  him.  At  last  the  day  came  when 
he  was  to  meet  Havgan  in  single  combat.  One 
blow  settled  it;  for  Pwyll,  Havgan's  destined  con- 
queror, thrust  his  antagonist  an  arm's  and  a  spear's 
length  over  the  crupper  of  his  horse,  breaking  his 
shield  and  armour,  and  mortally  wounding  him. 
Havgan  was  carried  away  to  die,  and  Pwyll,  in  the 
guise  of  Arawn,  received  the  submission  of  the  dead 
king's  subjects,  and  annexed  his  realm.  Then  he 
went  back  to  Glyn  Ct!ich,  to  keep  his  tryst  with 
Arawn. 

They  retook  their  own  shapes,  and  each  returned 
to  his  own  kingdom.  Pwyll  learned  that  Dyfed  had 
never  been  ruled  so  well,  or  been  so  prosperous,  as 
during  the  year  just  passed.  As  for  the  King  of 
Hades,  he  found  his  enemy  gone,  and  his  domains 


282         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

extended.  And  when  he  caressed  his  wife,  she 
asked  him  why  he  did  so  now,  after  the  lapse  of  a 
whole  year.  So  he  told  her  the  truth,  and  they  both 
agreed  that  they  had  indeed  got  a  true  friend  in 
Pwyll. 

After  this,  the  kings  of  Annwn  and  Dyfed  made 
their  friendship  strong  between  them.  From  that 
time  forward,  says  the  story,  Pwyll  was  no  longer 
called  Prince  of  Dyfed,  but  Pen  Annwn,  **the  Head 
of  Hades  ". 

The  second  mythological  incident  in  the  Mabinogi 
of  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed,  tells  how  the  Head  of 
Hades  won  his  wife,  Rhiannon,  thought  by  Professor 
Rhys  to  have  been  a  goddess  either  of  the  dawn  or 
of  the  moon.i  There  was  a  mound  outside  Pwyll's 
palace  at  Narberth  which  had  a  magical  quality. 
To  anyone  who  sat  upon  it  there  happened  one  of 
two  things:  either  he  received  wounds  and  blows, 
or  else  he  saw  a  wonder.  One  day,  it  occurred  to 
Pwyll  that  he  would  like  to  try  the  experience  of  the 
mound.     So  he  went  and  sat  upon  it. 

No  unseen  blows  assailed  Pwyll,  but  he  had  not 
been  sitting  long  upon  the  mound  before  he  saw, 
coming  towards  him,  **a  lady  on  a  pure- white  horse 
of  large  size,  with  a  garment  of  shining  gold  around 
her ",  riding  very  quietly.  He  sent  a  man  on  foot 
to  ask  her  who  she  was,  but,  though  she  seemed 
to  be  moving  so  slowly,  the  man  could  not  come  up 
to  her.  He  failed  utterly  to  overtake  her,  and  she 
passed  on  out  of  sight. 

The  next  day,  Pwyll  went  again  to  the  mound. 

1  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  678. 


The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades    283 

The  lady  appeared,  and,  this  time,  Pwyll  sent  a 
horseman.  At  first,  the  horseman  only  ambled  along 
at  about  the  same  pace  at  which  the  lady  seemed  to 
be  going;  then,  failing  to  get  near  her,  he  urged  his 
horse  into  a  gallop.  But,  whether  he  rode  slow  or 
fast,  he  could  come  no  closer  to  the  lady  than  be- 
fore, although  she  seemed  to  the  eyes  of  those  who 
watched  to  have  been  going  only  at  a  foot's  pace. 

The  day  after  that,  Pwyll  determined  to  accost 
the  lady  himself.  She  came  at  the  same  gentle 
walk,  and  Pwyll  at  first  rode  easily,  and  then  at 
his  horse  s  topmost  speed,  but  with  the  same  result, 
or  lack  of  it.  At  last,  in  despair,  he  called  to  the 
mysterious  damsel  to  stop.  '*  I  will  stop  gladly," 
said  she,  **and  it  would  have  been  better  for  your 
horse  if  you  had  asked  me  before."  She  told  him 
that  her  name  was  Rhiannon,  daughter  of  Heveydd 
the  Ancient.  The  nobles  of  her  realm  had  deter- 
mined to  give  her  in  marriage  against  her  will,  so 
she  had  come  to  seek  out  Pwyll,  who  was  the  man 
of  her  choice.  Pwyll  was  delighted  to  hear  this,  for 
he  thought  that  she  was  the  most  beautiful  lady 
he  had  ever  seen.  Before  they  parted,  they  had 
plighted  troth,  and  Pwyll  had  promised  to  appear 
on  that  day  twelvemonth  at  the  palace  of  her  father, 
Heveydd.  Then  she  vanished,  and  Pwyll  returned 
to  Narberth. 

At  the  appointed  time,  Pwyll  went  to  visit  He- 
veydd the  Ancient,  with  a  hundred  followers.  He 
was  received  with  much  welcome,  and  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  feast  put  under  his  command,  as  the 
Celts    seem    to   have  done   to  especially  honoured 


284         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

guests.  As  they  sat  at  meat,  with  Pwyll  between 
Rhiannon  and  her  father,  a  tall  auburn-haired  youth 
came  into  the  hall,  greeted  Pwyll,  and  asked  a  boon 
of  him.  *'  Whatever  boon  you  may  ask  of  me," 
said  Pwyll  thoughtlessly,  *'  if  it  is  in  my  power, 
you  shall  have  it."  Then  the  suitor  threw  off  all 
disguise,  called  the  guests  to  witness  Pwyll's  pro- 
mise, and  claimed  Rhiannon  as  his  bride.  Pwyll 
was  dumb.  "  Be  silent  as  long  as  you  will,"  said 
the  masterful  Rhiannon;  ^* never  did  a  man  make 
worse  use  of  his  wits  than  you  have  done." 
**  Lady,"  replied  the  amazed  Pwyll,  **  I  knew  not 
who  he  was."  *'  He  is  the  man  to  whom  they 
would  have  given  me  against  my  will,"  she  an- 
swered, **  Gwawl,  the  son  of  Cllid.  You  must 
bestow  me  upon  him  now,  lest  shame  befall  you." 
"  Never  will  I  do  that,"  said  Pwyll.  *'  Bestow 
me  upon  him,"  she  insisted,  *'and  I  will  cause 
that  I  shall  never  be  his."  So  Pwyll  promised 
Gwawl  that  he  would  make  a  feast  that  day  year, 
at  which  he  would  resign  Rhiannon  to  him. 

The  next  year,  the  feast  was  made,  and  Rhiannon 
sat  by  the  side  of  her  unwelcome  bridegroom.  But 
Pwyll  was  waiting  outside  the  palace,  with  a  hundred 
men  in  ambush.  When  the  banquet  was  at  its 
height,  he  came  into  the  hall,  dressed  in  coarse, 
ragged  garments,  shod  with  clumsy  old*  shoes,  and 
carrying  a  leather  bag.  But  the  bag  was  a  magic 
one,  which  Rhiannon  had  given  to  her  lover,  with 
directions  as  to  its  use.  Its  quality  was  that,  how- 
ever much  was  put  into  it,  it  could  never  be  filled. 
"  I  crave  a  boon,"  he  said  to  Gwawl.     "  What  is 


The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades    285 

it?"  Gwawl  replied.  ''I  am  a  poor  man,  and  all 
I  ask  is  to  have  this  bag  filled  with  meat."  Gwawl 
granted  what  he  said  was  "a  request  within  reason", 
and  ordered  his  followers  to  fill  the  bag.  But  the 
more  they  put  into  it,  the  more  room  in  it  there 
seemed  to  be.  Gwawl  was  astonished,  and  asked 
why  this  was.  Pwyll  replied  that  it  was  a  bag  that 
could  never  be  filled  until  someone  possessed  of 
lands  and  riches  should  tread  the  food  down  with 
both  his  feet.  *'  Do  this  for  the  man,"  said  Rhian- 
non  to  Gwawl.  ''Gladly  I  will,"  replied  he,  and 
put  both  his  feet  into  the  bag.  But  no  sooner 
had  he  done  so  than  Pwyll  slipped  the  bag  over 
Gwawl's  head,  and  tied  it  up  at  the  mouth.  He 
blew  his  horn,  and  all  his  followers  came  in.  **  What 
have  you  got  in  the  bag?"  asked  each  one  in  turn. 
'*A  badger,"  replied  Pwyll.  Then  each,  as  he 
received  Pwyll's  answer,  kicked  the  bag,  or  hit  it 
with  a  stick.  ''Then,"  says  the  story,  "was  the 
game  of  'Badger  in  the  Bag'  first  played." 

Gwawl,  however,  fared  better  than  we  suspect  that 
the  badger  usually  did;  for  Heveydd  the  Ancient 
interceded  for  him.  Pwyll  willingly  released  him,  on 
condition  that  he  promised  to  give  up  all  claim  to 
Rhiannon,  and  renounced  all  projects  of  revenge. 
Gwawl  consented,  and  gave  sureties,  and  went  away 
to  his  own  country  to  have  his  bruises  healed. 

This  country  of  Gwawl's  was,  no  doubt,  the  sky ; 
for  he  was  evidently  a  sun-god.  His  name  bewrays 
him;  for  the  meaning  of  "Gwawl"  is  " light ".^     It 

1  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  123  and  note.     Clfid  was  probably  the  goddess  of 
the  River  Clyde.     See  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend^  p.  294. 


286         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

was  one  of  the  hours  of  victory  for  the  dark  powers, 
such  as  were  celebrated  in  the  Celtic  calendar  by 
the  Feast  of  Samhain,  or  Summer  End. 

There  was  no  hindrance  now  to  the  marriage  of 
Pwyll  and  Rhiannon.  She  became  his  bride,  and 
returned  with  him  to  Dyfed. 

For  three  years,  they  were  without  an  heir,  and 
the  nobles  of  Dyfed  became  discontented.  They 
petitioned  Pwyll  to  take  another  wife  instead  of 
Rhiannon.  He  asked  for  a  years  delay.  This 
was  granted,  and,  before  the  end  of  the  year,  a  son 
was  born.  But,  on  the  night  of  his  birth,  the  six 
women  set  to  keep  watch  over  Rhiannon  all  fell 
asleep  at  once;  and  when  they  woke  up,  the  boy 
had  vanished.  Fearful  lest  their  lives  should  be 
forfeited  for  their  neglect,  they  agreed  to  swear 
that  Rhiannon  had  eaten  her  child.  They  killed 
a  litter  of  puppies,  and  smeared  some  of  the  blood 
on  Rhiannon's  face  and  hands,  and  put  some  of 
the  bones  by  her  side.  Then  they  awoke  her  with 
a  great  outcry,  and  accused  her.  She  swore  that 
she  knew  nothing  of  the  death  of  her  son,  but  the 
women  persisted  that  they  had  seen  her  devour 
him,  and  had  been  unable  to  prevent  it.  The  druids 
of  that  day  were  not  sufficiently  practical  anatomists 
to  be  able  to  tell  the  bones  of  a  child  from  those  of 
a  dog,  so  they  condemned  Rhiannon  upon  the  evi- 
dence of  the  women.  But,  even  now,  Pwyll  would 
not  put  her  away;  so  she  was  assigned  a  penance. 
For  seven  years,  she  was  to  sit  by  a  horse-block 
outside  the  gate,  and  offer  to  carry  visitors  into 
the  palace  upon   her  back.      '*  But  it  rarely  hap- 


The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades    287 

pened,"  says  the  Mabinogi,  "that  any  would  permit 
her  to  do  so." 

Exactly  what  had  become  of  Rhiannons  child 
seems  to  have  been  a  mystery  even  to  the  writer 
of  the  Mabinogi.  It  was,  at  any  rate,  in  some  way 
connected  with  the  equally  mysterious  disappearance 
on  every  night  of  the  first  of  May — Beltaine,  the 
Celtic  sun-festival — of  the  colts  foaled  by  a  beau- 
tiful mare  belonging  to  Teirnyon  Twryv  Vliant, 
one  of  Pwyll's  vassals.  Every  May-day  night,  the 
mare  foaled,  but  no  one  knew  what  became  of  the 
colt.  Teirnyon  decided  to  find  out.  He  caused 
the  mare  to  be  taken  into  a  house,  and  there  he 
watched  it,  fully  armed.  Early  in  the  night,  the  colt 
was  born.  Then  there  was  a  great  noise,  and  an 
arm  with  claws  came  through  the  window,  and 
gripped  the  colt's  mane.  Teirnyon  hacked  at  the 
arm  with  his  sword,  and  cut  it  off.  Then  he  heard 
wailing,  and  opened  the  door,  and  found  a  baby  in 
swaddling  clothes,  wrapped  in  a  satin  mantle.  He 
took  it  up  and  brought  it  to  his  wife,  and  they 
decided  to  adopt  it.  They  called  the  boy  Gwri 
Walk  Euryn,  that  is  **  Gwri  of  the  Golden  Hair". 

The  older  the  boy  grew,  the  more  it  seemed  to 
Teirnyon  that  he  became  like  Pwyll.  Then  he 
remembered  that  he  had  found  him  upon  the  very 
night  that  Rhiannon  lost  her  child.  So  he  con- 
sulted with  his  wife,  and  they  both  agreed  that 
the  baby  they  had  so  mysteriously  found  must  be 
the  same  that  Rhiannon  had  so  mysteriously 
lost.  And  they  decided  that  it  would  not  be 
right  for  them  to  keep  the  son  of  another,  while 


288         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

so  good  a  lady  as  Rhiannon  was  being  punished 
wrongfully. 

So,  the  very  next  day,  Teirnyon  set  out  for  Nar- 
berth,  taking  the  boy  with  him.  They  found  Rhi- 
annon sitting,  as  usual,  by  the  gate,  but  they  would 
not  allow  her  to  carry  them  into  the  palace  on 
her  back.  Pwyll  welcomed  them;  and  that  evening, 
as  they  sat  at  supper,  Teirnyon  told  his  hosts  the 
story  from  beginning  to  end.  And  he  presented 
her  son  to  Rhiannon. 

As  soon  as  everyone  in  the  palace  saw  the  boy, 
they  admitted  that  he  must  be  Pwyll's  son.  So 
they  adopted  him  with  delight;  and  Pendaran  Dy- 
fed,  the  head  druid  of  the  kingdom,  gave  him  a 
new  name.  He  called  him  '*  Pryderi^",  meaning 
**  trouble  ",  from  the  first  word  that  his  mother  had 
uttered  when  he  was  restored  to  her.  For  she 
had  said:  "  Trouble  is,  indeed,  at  an  end  for  me, 
if  this  be  true  ". 

*  Pronounced  Pri dairy. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE   WOOING   OF    BRANWEN    AND    THE 
BEHEADING    OF    BRAN^ 

In  the  second  of  the  "Four  Branches",  Pryderi, 
come  to  man's  estate,  and  married  to  a  wife  called 
Kicva,  appears  as  a  guest  or  vassal  at  the  court  of 
a  greater  god  of  Hades  than  himself — Bran,  the  son 
of  the  sea-god  Llyr.  The  children  of  Llyr — Bran, 
with  his  sister  Branwen  of  the  "Fair  Bosom"  and 
his  half-brother  Manawyddan,  as  well  as  two  sons 
of  Manawyddan  s  mother,  Penardun,  by  an  earlier 
marriage,  were  holding  court  at  Twr  Branwen^ 
**  Branwen  s  Tower",  now  called  Harlech.  As  they 
sat  on  a  cliff,  looking  over  the  sea,  they  saw  thirteen 
ships  coming  from  Ireland.  The  fleet  sailed  close 
under  the  land,  and  Bran  sent  messengers  to  ask 
who  they  were,  and  why  they  had  come.  It  was 
replied  that  they  were  the  vessels  of  Matholwch, 
King  of  Ireland,  and  that  he  had  come  to  ask  Brin 
for  his  sister  Branwen  in  marriage.  Bran  consented, 
and  they  fixed  upon  Aberffraw,  in  Anglesey,  as  the 
place  at  which  to  hold  the  wedding  feast.  Matholwch 
and  his  fleet  went  there  by  sea,  and  Bran  and  his 
host  by  land.  When  they  arrived,  and  met,  they 
set  up  pavilions;  for  "no  house  could  ever  hold  the 

^  Retold  from  Lady  Guest's  translation  of  the  Mabinogi  of  Branwen,  the  Daughter 
of  Llyr. 

(B219)       .289  T 


290         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

blessed  Bran".  And  there  Branwen  became  the 
King  of  Ireland's  bride.^ 

These  relations  were  not  long,  however,  allowed 
to  be  friendly.  Of  the  two  other  sons  of  Llyr  s  wife, 
Penardun,  the  mother  of  Manawyddan,  one  was 
called  Nissyen,  and  the  other,  Evnissyen.  Nissyen 
was  a  lover  of  peace,  and  would  always  "  cause  his 
family  to  be  friends  when  their  wrath  was  at  the 
highest",  but  Evnissyen  "  would  cause  strife  between 
his  two  brothers  when  they  were  most  at  peace". 
Now  Evnissyen  was  enraged  because  his  consent 
had  not  been  asked  to  Branwen  s  marriage.  Out  of 
spite  at  this,  he  cut  off  the  lips,  ears,  eyebrows,  and 
tails  of  all  Matholwch's  horses. 

When  the  King  of  Ireland  found  this  out,  he  was 
very  indignant  at  the  insult.  But  Brin  sent  an 
embassy  to  him  twice,  explaining  that  it  had  not 
been  done  by  his  consent  or  with  his  knowledg^e. 
He  appeased  Matholwch  by  giving  him  a  sound 
horse  in  place  of  every  one  that  Evnissyen  had 
mutilated,  as  well  as  a  staff  of  silver  as  large  and  tall 
as  Matholwch  himself,  and  a  plate  of  gold  as  broad 
as  Matholwch's  face.  To  these  gifts  he  also  added  a 
magic  cauldron  brought  from  Ireland.  Its  property 
was  that  any  slain  man  who  was  put  into  it  was 
brought  to  life  again,  except  that  he  lost  the  use  of 
speech.  The  King  of  Ireland  accepted  this  recom- 
pense for  the  insult  done  him,  renewed  his  friendship 
with  the  children  of  Llyr,  and  sailed  away  with 
Branwen  to  Ireland. 

*  Rhys — Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology — compares  Matholwch  with  Mith,  and  the 
story,  generally,  with  the  Greek  myth  of  Persephone. 


Branwen  and  Brdn  291 

Before  a  year  was  over,  Branwen  bore  a  son. 
They  called  him  Gwern,  and  put  him  out  to  be 
foster-nursed  among  the  best  men  of  Ireland.  But, 
during  the  second  year,  news  came  to  Ireland  of  the 
insult  that  Matholwch  had  received  in  Britain.  The 
King  of  Ireland's  foster-brothers  and  near  relations 
insisted  that  he  should  revenge  himself  upon  Bran- 
wen. So  the  queen  was  compelled  to  serve  in  the 
kitchen,  and,  every  day,  the  butcher  gave  her  a  box 
upon  the  ear.  That  this  should  not  become  known 
to  Bran,  all  traffic  was  forbidden  between  Ireland 
and  Britain.     This  went  on  for  three  years. 

But,  in  the  meantime,  Branwen  had  reared  a 
tame  starling,  and  she  taught  it  to  speak,  and  tied 
a  letter  of  complaint  to  the  root  of  its  wing,  and  sent 
it  off  to  Britain.  At  last  it  found  Brdn,  whom  its 
mistress  had  described  to  it,  and  settled  upon  his 
shoulder,  ruffling  its  wings.  This  exposed  the  letter, 
and  Bran  read  it.  He  sent  messengers  to  one  hun- 
dred and  forty-four  countries,  to  raise  an  army  to  go 
to  Ireland.  Leaving  his  son  Caradawc,  with  seven 
others,  in  charge  of  Britain,  he  started — himself 
wading  through  the  sea,  while  his  men  went  by 
ship. 

No  one  in  Ireland  knew  that  they  were  f::oming 
until  the  royal  swineherds,  tending  theif  pfgs  near 
the  sea-shore,  beheld  a  marvel.  They  saw  a  forest 
on  the  surface  of  the  sea — a  place  where  certainly 
no  forest  had  been  before — and,  near  it,  a  mountain 
with  a  lofty  ridge  on  its  top,  and  a  lake  on  each  side 
of  the  ridge.  Both  the  forest  and  the  mountain  were 
swiftly  moving   towards   Ireland.       They  informed 


292         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Matholwch,  who  could  not  understand  it,  and  sent 
messengers  to  ask  Branwen  what  she  thought  it 
might  be.  **  It  is  the  men  of  the  Island  of  the 
Mighty\"  said  she,  **who  are  coming  here  because 
they  have  heard  of  my  ill-treatment.  The  forest 
that  is  seen  on  the  sea  is  made  of  the  masts  of  ships. 
The  mountain  is  my  brother  Bran,  wading  into  shoal 
water;  the  lofty  ridge  is  his  nose,  and  the  two  lakes, 
one  on  each  side  of  it,  are  his  eyes." 

The  men  of  Ireland  were  terrified.  They  fled 
beyond  the  Shannon,  and  broke  down  the  bridge 
over  it.  But  Brin  lay  down  across  the  river, 
and  his  army  walked  over  him  to  the  opposite 
side. 

Matholwch  now  sent  messengers  suing  for  peace. 
He  offered  to  resign  the  throne  of  Ireland  to  Gwern, 
Branwen's  son  and  Bran  s  nephew.  **  Shall  I  not 
have  the  kingdom  myself."^"  said  Bran,  and  would 
not  hear  of  anything  else.  So  the  counsellors  of 
Matholwch  advised  him  to  conciliate  Bran  by  build- 
ing him  a  house  so  large  that  it  would  be  the  first 
house  that  had  ever  held  him,  and,  in  it,  to  hand 
over  the  kingdom  to  his  will.  Brin  consented  to 
accept  this,  and  the  vast  house  was  built. 

It  concealed  treachery.  Upon  each  side  of  the 
hundred  pillars  of  the  house  was  hung  a  bag,  and  in 
the  bag  was  an  armed  man,  who  was  to  cut  himself 
out  at  a  given  signal.  But  Evnissyen  came  into  the 
house,  and  seeing  the  bags  there,  suspected  the 
plot.  **  What  is  in  this  bag?"  he  said  to  one  of  the 
Irish,   as  he  came  up  to  the  first  one.      *'  Meal/' 

^  A  bardic  name  for  Britain 


Branwen  and  Bran  293 

replied  the  Irishman.  Then  Evnissyen  kneaded 
the  bag  in  his  hands,  as  though  it  really  contained 
meal,  until  he  had  killed  the  man  inside;  and  he 
treated  all  of  them  in  turn  in  the  same  way. 

A  little  later,  the  two  hosts  met  in  the  house. 
The  men  of  Ireland  came  in  on  one  side,  and  the 
men  of  Britain  on  the  other,  and  met  at  the  hearth 
in  the  middle,  and  sat  down.  The  Irish  court  did 
homage  to  Brin,  and  they  crowned  Gwern,  Bran- 
wens  son,  King  of  Ireland  in  place  of  Matholwch. 
When  the  ceremonies  were  over,  the  boy  went  from 
one  to  another  of  his  uncles,  to  make  acquaintance 
with  them.  Bran  fondled  and  caressed  him,  and  so 
did  Manawyddan,  and  Nissyen.  But  when  he  came 
to  Evnissyen,  the  wicked  son  of  Penardun  seized 
the  child  by  the  feet,  and  dropped  him  head  first 
into  the  great  fire. 

When  Branwen  saw  her  son  killed,  she  tried  to 
leap  into  the  flames  after  him,  but  Bran  held  her 
back.  Then  every  man  armed  himself,  and  such  a 
tumult  was  never  heard  in  one  house  before.  Day 
after  day  they  fought;  but  the  Irish  had  the  advan- 
tage, for  they  had  only  to  plunge  their  dead  men 
into  the  magic  cauldron  to  bring  them  back  to  life. 
When  Evnissyen  knew  this,  he  saw  a  way  of  aton- 
ing for  the  misfortunes  his  evil  nature  had  brought 
upon  Britain.  He  disguised  himself  as  an  Irishman, 
and  lay  upon  the  floor  as  if  dead,  until  they  put  him 
into  the  cauldron.  Then  he  stretched  himself,  and, 
with  one  desperate  effort,  burst  both  the  cauldron 
and  his  own  heart. 

Thus  things  were  made  equal  again,  and  in  the 


294         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

next  battle  the  men  of  Britain  killed  all  the  Irish. 
But  of  themselves  there  were  only  seven  left  un- 
hurt— Pryderi;  Manawyddan ;  Gluneu,  the  son  of 
Taran^;  Taliesin  the  Bard;  Ynawc;  Grudyen,  the 
son  of  Muryel;  and  Heilyn,  the  son  of  Gwynn  the 
Ancient. 

Brdn  himself  was  wounded  in  the  foot  with  a  poi- 
soned dart,  and  was  in  agony.  So  he  ordered  his 
seven  surviving  followers  to  cut  off  his  head,  and  to 
take  it  to  the  White  Mount  in  London^  and  bury 
it  there,  with  the  face  towards  France.  He  pro- 
phesied how  they  would  perform  the  journey.  At 
Harlech  they  would  be  feasting  seven  years,  the 
birds  of  Rhiannon  singing  to  them  all  the  time, 
and  Brin's  own  head  conversing  with  them  as 
agreeably  as  when  it  was  on  his  body.  Then  they 
would  be  fourscore  years  at  G wales  ^  All  this 
while.  Bran's  head  would  remain  uncorrupted,  and 
would  talk  so  pleasantly  that  they  would  forget  the 
flight  of  time.  But,  at  the  destined  hour,  someone 
would  open  a  door  which  looked  towards  Cornwall, 
and,  after  that,  they  could  stay  no  longer,  but  must 
hurry  to  London  to  bury  the  head. 

So  the  seven  beheaded  Br^n,  and  set  off,  taking 
Branwen  also  with  them.  They  landed  at  the 
mouth  of  the  River  Alaw,  in  Anglesey.  Branwen 
first  looked  back  towards  Ireland,  and  then  forward 
towards   Britain.      **Alas,"  she  cried,   **that   I   was 

^  This  personage  may  have  been  the  same  as  the  Gaulish  god  Taranis.  Mention, 
too,  is  made  in  an  ancient  Irish  glossary  of  "  Etirun,  an  idol  of  the  Britons". 

2  This  spot,  called  by  a  twelfth-century  Welsh  poet  ' '  The  White  Eminence  of 
London,  a  place  of  splendid  fame",  was  probably  the  hill  on  which  the  Tower  of 
London  now  stands.         ^  The  island  of  Gresholm,  off  the  coast  of  Pembrokeshire. 


Branwen  and  Bran  295 

ever  born!  two  islands  have  been  destroyed  because 
of  me."  Her  heart  broke  with  sorrow,  and  she 
died.  An  old  Welsh  poem  says,  with  a  touch  of 
real  pathos: 

"  Softened  were  the  voices  in  the  brakes 
Of  the  wondering  birds 
On  seeing  the  fair  body. 
Will  there  not  be  relating  again 
Of  that  which  befel  the  paragon 
At  the  stream  of  Amlwch?"^ 

**  They  made  her  a  four-sided  grave,"  says  the 
Mabinogi,  ''and  buried  her  upon  the  banks  of  the 
Alaw."  The  traditionary  spot  has  always  borne  the 
name  of  Ynys  Branwen,  and,  curiously  enough,  an 
urn  was  found  there,  in  181 3,  full  of  ashes  and  half- 
burnt  bones,  which  certain  enthusiastic  local  anti- 
quaries saw  "every  reason  to  suppose"  were  those 
of  the  fair  British  Aphroditd  herself.* 

The  seven  went  on  towards  Harlech,  and,  as  they 
journeyed,  they  met  men  and  women  who  gave 
them  the  latest  news.  Caswallawn,  a  son  of  Beli, 
the  husband  of  D6n,  had  destroyed  the  ministers 
left  behind  by  Br^n  to  take  care  of  Britain.  He 
had  made  himself  invisible  by  the  help  of  a  magic 
veil,  and  thus  had  killed  all  of  them  except  Penda- 
ran  Dyfed,  foster-father  of  Pryderi,  who  had  escaped 
into  the  woods,  and  Caradawc  son  of  Bran,  whose 
heart  had  broken  from  grief.  Thus  he  had  made 
himself    king    of    the    whole    island    in    place    of 

1  The  Gododin  of  Aneurin,  as  translated  by  T.  Stephens.     Branwen  is  there 
called  "the  lady  Bradwen". 
'  See  note  to  Branwen,  the  Daughter  of  Llyr  in  Lady  Guest's  Mabinogion. 


296         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Manawyddan,  its  rightful  heir  now  that  Bran  was 
dead. 

However,  the  destiny  was  upon  the  seven  that 
they  should  go  on  with  their  leader's  head.  They 
went  to  Harlech  and  feasted  for  seven  years,  the 
three  birds  of  Rhiannon  singing  them  songs  com- 
pared with  which  all  other  songs  seemed  un- 
melodious.  Then  they  spent  fourscore  years  in  the 
Isle  of  Gwales,  eating  and  drinking,  and  listening  to 
the  pleasant  conversation  of  Bran's  head.  The 
"  Entertaining  of  the  Noble  Head "  this  eighty 
years'  feast  was  called.  Brdn's  head,  indeed,  is 
almost  more  notable  in  British  mythology  than  Brin 
before  he  was  decapitated.  Taliesin  and  the  other 
bards  invoke  it  repeatedly  as  Urddawl  Ben  (the 
**  Venerable  Head")  and  Uther  Ben  (the  ** Wonder- 
ful Head  "). 

But  all  pleasure  came  to  an  end  when  Heilyn,  the 
son  of  Gwynn,  opened  the  forbidden  door,  like 
Bluebeard's  wife,  **to  know  if  that  was  true  which 
was  said  concerning  it".  As  soon  as  they  looked 
towards  Cornwall,  the  glamour  that  had  kept  them 
merry  for  eighty-seven  years  failed,  and  left  them  as 
grieved  about  the  death  of  their  lord  as  though  it 
had  happened  that  very  day.  They  could  not  rest 
for  sorrow,  but  went  at  once  to  London,  and  laid 
the  now  dumb  and  corrupting  head  in  its  grave 
on  Tower  Hill,  with  its  face  turned  towards  France, 
to  watch  that  no  foe  came  from  foreign  lands  to 
Britain.  There  it  reposed  until,  ages  afterwards, 
Arthur,  in  his  pride  of  heart,  dug  it  up,  *'as  he 
thought  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  hold  the  island 


LISTENING    TO    THE    PLEASANT    CONVERSATION    OF    BRAN'S    HEAD 

After  the  painting  by  J.  H.  F.  Bacon,  A.R.A. 


Branwen  and  Bran  297 

otherwise  than  by  valour".     Disaster,  in  the  shape 

of 

"  the  godless  hosts 
Of  heathen  swarming  o'er  the  Northern  sea  V 

came  of  this  disinterment;  and  therefore  it  is  called, 
in  a  triad,  one  of  the  "  Three  Wicked  Uncoverings 
of  Britain  ". 

*  Tennyson :  Idylls  of  the  King — ' '  Guinevere  ** . 


CHAPTER   XIX 

THE   WAR   OF    ENCHANTMENTS* 

Manawyddan  was  now  the  sole  survivor  of  the 
family  of  Llyr.  He  was  homeless  and  landless. 
But  Pryderi  offered  to  give  him  a  realm  in  Dyfed, 
and  his  mother,  Rhiannon,  for  a  wife.  The  lady, 
her  son  explained,  was  still  not  uncomely,  and  her 
conversation  was  pleasing.  Manawyddan  seems 
to  have  found  her  attractive,  while  Rhiannon  was 
not  less  taken  with  the  son  of  Llyr.  They  were 
wedded,  and  so  great  became  the  friendship  of 
Pryderi  and  Kicva,  Manawyddan  and  Rhiannon, 
that  the  four  were  seldom  apart. 

One  day,  after  holding  a  feast  at  Narberth,  they- 
went  up  to  the  same  magic  mound  where  Rhiannon 
had  first  met  Pwyll.  As  they  sat  there,  thunder 
pealed,  and  immediately  a  thick  mist  sprang  up,  so 
that  not  one  of  them  could  see  the  other.  When 
it  cleared,  they  found  themselves  alone  in  an  un- 
inhabited country.  Except  for  their  own  castle,  the 
land  was  desert  and  untilled,  without  sign  of  dwell- 
ing, man,  or  beast.  One  touch  of  some  unknown 
magic  had  utterly  changed  the  face  of  Dyfed  from 
a  rich  realm  to  a  wilderness. 

Manawyddan  and  Pryderi,  Rhiannon  and  Kicva 

I  Retold  from  Lady  Guest's  translation  of  the  Mabinogi  of  Manawyddan,  the 
Son  of  Llyr. 


The   War  of  Enchantments  299 

traversed  the  country  on  all  sides,  but  found  nothing 
except  desolation  and  wild  beasts.  For  two  years 
they  lived  in  the  open  upon  game  and  honey. 

During  the  third  year,  they  grew  weary  of  this 
wild  life,  and  decided  to  go  into  Lloegyr^  and  sup- 
port themselves  by  some  handicraft.  Manawyddan 
could  make  saddles,  and  he  made  them  so  well  that 
soon  no  one  in  Hereford,  where  they  had  settled, 
would  buy  from  any  saddler  but  himself  This 
aroused  the  enmity  of  all  the  other  saddlers,  and 
they  conspired  to  kill  the  strangers.  So  the  four 
went  to  another  city. 

Here  they  made  shields,  and  soon  no  one  would 
purchase  a  shield  unless  it  had  been  made  by 
Manawyddan  and  Pryderi.  The  shield  -  makers 
became  jealous,  and  again  a  move  had  to  be  made. 

But  they  fared  no  better  at  the  next  town,  where 
they  practised  the  craft  of  cordwainers,  Manawyddan 
shaping  the  shoes  and  Pryderi  stitching  them.  So 
they  went  back  to  Dyfed  again,  and  occupied  them- 
selves in  hunting. 

One  day,  the  hounds  of  Manawyddan  and  Pryderi 
roused  a  white  wild  boar.  They  chased  it  till  they 
came  to  a  castle  at  a  place  where  both  the  hunts- 
men were  certain  that  no  castle  had  been  before. 
Into  this  castle  went  the  boar,  and  the  hounds 
after  it.  For  some  time,  Manawyddan  and  Pryderi 
waited  in  vain  for  their  return.  Pryderi  then  pro- 
posed that  he  should  go  into  the  castle,  and  see  what 
had  become  of  them.  Manawyddan  tried  to  dis- 
suade him,  declaring  that  whoever  their  enemy  was 

^  Saxon  Britain — England. 


300         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

who  had  laid  Dyfed  waste  had  also  caused  the 
appearance  of  this  castle.  But  Pryderi  insisted 
upon  entering. 

In  the  castle,  he  found  neither  the  boar  nor  his 
hounds,  nor  any  trace  of  man  or  beast.  There  was 
nothing  but  a  fountain  in  the  centre  of  the  castle 
floor,  and,  on  the  brink  of  the  fountain,  a  beautiful 
golden  bowl  fastened  to  a  marble  slab  by  chains. 

Pryderi  was  so  pleased  with  the  beauty  of  the 
bowl  that  he  put  out  his  hands  and  took  hold  of  it. 
Whereupon  his  hands  stuck  to  the  bowl,  so  that  he 
could  not  move  from  where  he  stood. 

Manawyddan  waited  for  him  till  the  evening,  and 
then  returned  to  the  palace,  and  told  Rhiannon. 
She,  more  daring  than  her  husband,  rebuked  him 
for  cowardice,  and  went  straight  to  the  magic 
castle.  In  the  court  she  found  Pryderi,  his  hands 
still  glued  to  the  bowl  and  his  feet  to  the  slab. 
She  tried  to  free  him,  but  became  fixed,  herself,  and, 
with  a  clap  of  thunder  and  a  fall  of  mist,  the  castle 
vanished  with  its  two  prisoners. 

Manawyddan  was  now  left  alone  with  Kicva, 
Pryderi  s  wife.  He  calmed  her  fears,  and  assured 
her  of  his  protection.  But  they  had  lost  their  dogs, 
and  could  not  hunt  any  more,  so  they  set  out  to- 
gether to  Lloegyr,  to  practise  again  Manawyddan  s 
old  trade  of  cordwainer.  A  second  time,  the  envious 
cordwainers  conspired  to  kill  them,  so  they  were 
obliged  to  return  to  Dyfed. 

But  Manawyddan  took  back  a  burden  of  wheat 
with  him  to  Narberth,  and  sowed  three  crofts,  all  of 
which  sprang  up  abundantly. 


I 


The  War  of  Enchantments  301 

When  harvest  time  came,  he  went  to  look  at  his 
first  croft,  and  found  it  ripe.  **  I  will  reap  this  to- 
morrow," he  said.  But  in  the  morning  he  found 
nothing  but  the  bare  straw.  Every  ear  had  been 
taken  away. 

So  he  went  to  the  next  croft,  which  was  also  ripe. 
But,  when  he  came  to  cut  it,  he  found  it  had  been 
stripped  like  the  first.  Then  he  knew  that  whoever 
had  wasted  Dyfed,  and  carried  off  Rhiannon  and 
Pryderi,  was  also  at  work  upon  his  wheat. 

The  third  croft  was  also  ripe,  and  over  this  one 
he  determined  to  keep  watch.  In  the  evening  he 
armed  himself  and  waited.  At  midnight  he  heard 
a  great  tumult,  and,  looking  out,  saw  a  host  of  mice 
coming.  Each  mouse  bit  off  an  ear  of  wheat  and 
ran  off  with  it.  He  rushed  among  them,  but  could 
only  catch  one,  which  was  more  sluggish  than  the 
rest.  This  one  he  put  into  his  glove,  and  took  it 
back,  and  showed  it  to  Kicva. 

"To-morrow  I  will  hang  it,"  he  said.  "  It  is  not 
a  fit  thing  for  a  man  of  your  dignity  to  hang  a 
mouse,"  she  replied.  **  Nevertheless  will  I  do  so," 
said  he.     *'  Do  so  then,"  said  Kicva. 

The  next  morning,  Manawyddan  went  to  the 
magic  mound,  and  set  up  two  forks  on  it,  to  make  a 
gallows.  He  had  just  finished,  when  a  man  dressed 
like  a  poor  scholar  came  towards  him,  and  greeted 
him. 

*' What  are  you  doing,  Lord?"  he  said. 

"  I  am  going  to  hang  a  thief,"  replied  Manaw- 
yddan. 

''What  sort  of  a  thief.'*     I  see  an  animal  like  a 


302         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

mouse  in  your  hand,  but  a  man  of  rank  like  yours 
should  not  touch  so  mean  a  creature.  Let  it  go 
free. " 

''  I  caught  It  robbing  me,"  replied  Manawyddan, 
**and  it  shall  die  a  thief's  death." 

"  I  do  not  care  to  see  a  man  like  you  doing  such 
a  thing,"  said  the  scholar.  **  I  will  give  you  a  pound 
to  let  it  go." 

*'  I  will  not  let  it  go,"  replied  Manawyddan,  *^nor 
will  I  sell  it." 

''As  you  will,  Lord.  It  is  nothing  to  me,"  re- 
turned the  scholar.     And  he  went  away. 

Manawyddan  laid  a  cross-bar  along  the  forks. 
As  he  did  so,  another  man  came  by,  a  priest  riding 
on  a  horse.  He  asked  Manawyddan  what  he  was 
doing,  and  was  told.  **  My  lord,"  he  said,  "such  a 
reptile  is  worth  nothing  to  buy,  but  rather  than  see 
you  degrade  yourself  by  touching  it,  I  will  give  you 
three  pounds  to  let  it  go." 

'*  I  will  take  no  money  for  it,"  replied  Manaw- 
yddan.    **  It  shall  be  hanged." 

'*  Let  it  be  hanged,"  said  the  priest,  and  went  his 
way. 

Manawyddan  put  the  noose  round  the  mouse's 
neck,  and  was  just  going  to  draw  it  up,  when  he  saw 
a  bishop  coming,  with  his  whole  retinue. 

*'Thy  blessing.  Lord  Bishop,"  he  said. 

*'  Heaven's  blessing  upon  you,"  said  the  bishop. 
''What  are  you  doing?" 

"  I  am  hanging  a  thief,"  replied  Manawyddan. 
"This  mouse  has  robbed  me." 

"  Since   I   happen  to  have  come  at  its  doom,  I 


The  War  of  Enchantments  303 

will  ransom  it,"  said  the  bishop.  **  Here  are  seven 
pounds.     Take  them,  and  let  it  go." 

*'  I  will  not  let  it  go,"  replied  Manawyddan. 

"  I  will  give  you  twenty-four  pounds  of  ready 
money  if  you  will  let  it  go,"  said  the  bishop. 

**  I  would  not,  for  as  much  again,"  replied 
Manawyddan. 

''If  you  will  not  free  it  for  that,"  said  the  bishop, 
**  I  will  give  you  all  my  horses  and  their  baggage  to 
let  it  go." 

*'  I  will  not,"  replied  Manawyddan. 

"Then  name  your  own  price,"  said  the  bishop. 

"That  offer  I  accept,"  replied  Manawyddan. 
"  My  price  is  that  Rhiannon  and  Pryderi  be  set 
free." 

"  They  shall  be  set  free,"  replied  the  bishop. 

"  Still  I  will  not  let  the  mouse  go,"  said  Manaw- 
yddan. 

"What  more  do  you  ask?"  exclaimed  the  bishop. 

"  That  the  charm  be  removed  from  Dyfed," 
replied  Manawyddan. 

"It  shall  be  removed,"  promised  the  bishop. 
"So  set  the  mouse  free." 

"  I  will  not,"  said  Manawyddan,  "till  I  know  who 
the  mouse  is." 

"She  is  my  wife,"  replied  the  bishop,  "and  I  am 
called  Llwyd,  the  son  of  Kilcoed,  and  I  cast  the 
charm  over  Dyfed,  and  upon  Rhiannon  and  Pryderi, 
to  avenge  Gwawl  son  of  Cldd  for  the  game  of 
'badger  in  the  bag*  which  was  played  on  him  by 
Pwyll,  Head  of  Annwn.  It  was  my  household  that 
came  in  the  guise  of  mice  and  took  away  your  corn. 


304         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

But  since  my  wife  has  been  caught,  I  will  restore 
Rhiannon  and  Pryderi  and  take  the  charm  off  Dyfed 
if  you  will  let  her  go." 

**  I  will  not  let  her  go,"  said  Manawyddan,  **  until 
you  have  promised  that  there  shall  be  no  charm  put 
upon  Dyfed  again." 

"  I  will  promise  that  also,"  replied  Llwyd.  '*  So 
let  her  go." 

"  I  will  not  let  her  go,"  said  Manawyddan,  "  unless 
you  swear  to  take  no  revenge  for  this  hereafter." 

"You  have  done  wisely  to  claim  that,"  replied 
Llwyd.  **  Much  trouble  would  else  have  come 
upon  your  head  because  of  this.  Now  I  swear  it. 
So  set  my  wife  free." 

'*  I  will  not,"  said  Manawyddan,  *' until  I  see 
Rhiannon  and  Pryderi. 

Then  he  saw  them  coming  towards  him;  and  they 
greeted  one  another. 

**  Now  set  my  wife  free,"  said  the  bishop. 

"  I  will,  gladly,"  replied  Manawyddan.  So  he 
released  the  mouse,  and  Llwyd  struck  her  with  a 
wand,  and  turned  her  into  "  a  young  woman,  the 
fairest  ever  seen  ". 

And  when  Manawyddan  looked  round  him,  he 
saw  Dyfed  tilled  and  cultivated  again,  as  it  had 
formerly  been. 

The  powers  of  light  had,  this  time,  the  victory. 
Litde  by  little,  they  increased  their  mastery  over  the 
dominion  of  darkness,  until  we  find  the  survivors 
of  the  families  of  Llyr  and  Pwyll  mere  vassals  of 
Arthur. 


CHAPTER   XX 

THE   VICTORIES    OF    LIGHT   OVER   DARKNESS 

The  powers  of  light  were,  however,  by  no  means 
invariably  successful  in  their  struggles  with  the 
powers  of  darkness.  Even  Gwydion  son  of  Don 
had  to  serve  his  apprenticeship  to  misfortune.  As- 
sailing Caer  Sidi — Hades^  under  one  of  its  many 
titles, — he  was  caught  by  Pwyll  and  Pryderi,  and 
endured  a  long  imprisonment.^  The  sufferings  he 
underwent  made  him  a  bard — an  ancient  Celtic  idea 
which  one  can  still  see  surviving  in  the  popular 
tradition  that  whoever  d^res  to  spend  a  night  alone 
either  upon  the  chair  of  the  Giant  Idris  (the  summit 
of  Cader  Idris,  in  Merionethshire),  or  under  the 
haunted  Black  Stone  of  Arddu,  upon  the  Llanberis 
side  of  Snowdon,  will  be  found  in  the  morning 
either  inspired  or  mad.^  How  he  escaped  we  are 
not  told;  but  the  episode  does  not  seem  to  have 
quenched  his  ardour  against  the  natural  enemies 
of  his  kind. 

Helped  by  his  brother,  Amaethon,  god  of  agri- 
culture, and  his  son,  Lieu,  he  fought  the  Battle  of 
Godeu,  or  **  the  Trees  ",  an  exploit  which  is  not  the 
least  curious  of  Celtic  myths.  It  is  known  also  as 
the  Battle  of  Achren,  or  Ochren,  a  name  for  Hades 

1  Or  the  Celtic  Elysium,  "  a  mythical  country  beneath  the  waves  of  the  sea". 
'  See  the  Spoiling  of  Annwn,  quoted  in  chap,  xxi — "The  Mythological  'Com- 
ing of  Arthur '  ".  3  R^yg .  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  250-251. 

(B219)  305  U 


3o6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

of  unknown  meaning,  but  appearing  again  in  the 
remarkable  Welsh  poem  which  describes  the  ''Spoil- 
ing of  Annwn  "  by  Arthur.  The  King  of  Achren 
was  Arawn;  and  he  was  helped  by  Bran,  who 
apparently  had  not  then  made  his  fatal  journey  to 
Ireland.  The  war  was  made  to  secure  three  boons 
for  man — the  dog,  the  deer,  and  the  lapwing,  all  of 
them  creatures  for  some  reason  sacred  to  the  gods 
of  the  nether  world. 

Gwydion  was  this  time  not  alone,  as  he  appa- 
rently was  when  he  made  his  first  unfortunate  recon- 
naissance of  Hades.  Besides  his  brother  and  his 
son,  he  had  an  army  which  he  raised  for  the  pur- 
pose. For  a  leader  of  Gwydion's  magical  attain- 
ments there  was  i\o  need  of  standing  troops.  He 
could  call  battalions  into  being  with  a  charm,  and 
dismiss  them  when  they  were  no  longer  needed. 
The  name  of  the  battle  shows  what  he  did  on  this 
occasion;  and  the  bard  Taliesin  adds  his  testimony: 

"  I   have  been  in  the   battle  of  Godeu,  with  Lieu   and 
Gwydion, 
They  changed  the  forms  of  the  elementary  trees  and 
sedges". 

In  a  poem  devoted  to  it^  he  describes  in  detail 
what  happened.  The  trees  and  grasses,  he  tells  us, 
hurried  to  the  fight:  the  alders  led  the  van,  but  the 
willows  and  the  quickens  came  late,  and  the  birch, 
though  courageous,  took  long  in  arraying  himself; 

1  Book  of  Taliesin  VIII,  Vol.  I,  p.  276,  of  Skene.  I  have  followed  Skene's 
translation,  with  the  especial  exception  of  the  curious  line  referring  to  the  bean,  so 
translated  in  D.  W.  Nash's  Taliesin.  If  a  correct  rendering  of  the  Welsh  original, 
it  offers  an  interesting  parallel  to  certain  superstitions  of  the  Greeks  concerning 
this  vegetable. 


I 


The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness     307 

the  elm  stood  firm  in  the  centre  of  the  battle, 
and  would  not  yield  a  foot;  heaven  and  earth 
trembled  before  the  advance  of  the  oak-tree,  that 
stout  door-keeper  against  an  enemy;  the  heroic 
holly  and  the  hawthorn  defended  themselves  with 
their  spikes;  the  heather  kept  off  the  enemy  on 
every  side,  and  the  broom  was  well  to  the  front, 
but  the  fern  was  plundered,  and  the  furze  did  not 
do  well;  the  stout,  lofty  pine,  the  intruding  pear- 
tree,  the  gloomy  ash,  the  bashful  chestnut-tree,  the 
prosperous  beech,  the  long -enduring  poplar,  the 
scarce  plum-tree,  the  shelter -seeking  privet  and 
woodbine,  the  wild,  foreign  laburnum;  "the  bean, 
bearing  in  its  shade  an  army  of  phantoms  " ;  rose- 
bush, raspberry,  ivy,  cherry-tree,  and  medlar — all 
took  their  parts. 

In  the  ranks  of  Hades  there  were  equally  strange 
fighters.  We  are  told  of  a  hundred-headed  beast, 
carrying  a  formidable  battalion  under  the  root  of  its 
tongue  and  another  in  the  back  of  its  head;  there 
was  a  gaping  black  toad  with  a  hundred  claws;  and 
a  crested  snake  of  many  colours,  within  whose  flesh 
a  hundred  souls  were  tormented  for  their  sins — in 
fact,  it  would  need  a  Dore  or  a  Dante  to  do  justice 
to  this  weird  battle  between  the  arrayed  magics  of 
heaven  and  hell. 

It  was  magic  that  decided  its  fate.  There  was 
a  fighter  in  the  ranks  of  Hades  who  could  not  be 
overcome  unless  his  antagonist  guessed  his  name — 
a  peculiarity  of  the  terrene  gods,  remarks  Professor 
Rhys/  which  has  been  preserved  in  our   popular 

*  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  note  to  p.  245. 


3o8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

fairy  tales.     Gwydion  guessed  the  name,  and  sang 
these  two  verses: — 

"  Sure-hoofed  is  my  steed  impelled  by  the  spur; 
The  high  sprigs  of  alder  are  on  thy  shield ; 
Bran  art  thou  called,  of  the  glittering  branches ! 

"Sure-hoofed  is  my  steed  in  the  day  of  battle: 
The  high  sprigs  of  alder  are  on  thy  hand : 
Brltn  ...  by  the  branch  thou  bearest 
Has  Amaethon  the  Good  prevailed!"^ 

Thus  the  power  of  the  dark  gods  was  broken, 
and  the  sons  of  Don  retained  for  the  use  of  men 
the  deer,  the  dog,  and  the  lapwing,  stolen  from  that 
underworld,  whence  all  good  gifts  came. 

It  was  always  to  obtain  some  practical  benefit 
that  the  gods  of  light  fought  against  the  gods  of 
darkness.  The  last  and  greatest  of  Gwydion's  raids 
upon  Hades  was  undertaken  to  procure — pork!* 

Gwydion  had  heard  that  there  had  come  to  Dyfed 
some  strange  beasts,  such  as  had  never  been  seen 
before.  They  were  called  **pigs"  or  ** swine",  and 
Arawn,  King  of  Annwn,  had  sent  them  as  a  gift  to 
Pryderi  son  of  Pwyll.  They  were  small  animals, 
and  their  flesh  was  said  to  be  better  than  the  flesh 
of  oxen.  He  thought  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to 
get  them,  either  by  force  or  fraud,  from  the  dark 
powers.  Math  son  of  Mathonwy,  who  ruled  the 
children  of  Don  from  his  Olympus  of  Caer  DathyP, 
gave  his  consent,  and  Gwydion  set  off,  with  eleven 

1  Lady  Guest's  translation  in  her  notes  to  Kulhwch  and  Olwen, 

*  The  following  episode  is  retold  from  Lady  Guest's  translation  of  the  Mabin- 

ogi  oi  Mdih,  Son  of  Mathonwy. 
'  Now  called  Pen  y  Gaer.     It  is  on  the  summit  of  a  hill  half-way  between  Llan> 

rwst  and  Conway,  and  about  a  mile  from  the  station  of  Llanbedr. 


The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness     309 

others,  to  Pryderi's  palace  \  They  disguised  them- 
selves as  bards,  so  as  to  be  received  by  Pryderi, 
and  Gwydion,  who  was  **the  best  teller  of  tales  in 
the  world ",  entertained  the  Prince  of  Dyfed  and 
his  court  more  than  they  had  ever  been  entertained 
by  any  story-teller  before.  Then  he  asked  Pryderi 
to  grant  him  a  boon — the  animals  which  had  come 
from  Annwn.  But  Pryderi  had  pledged  his  word 
to  Arawn  that  he  would  neither  sell  nor  give  away 
any  of  the  new  creatures  until  they  had  increased 
to  double  their  number,  and  he  told  the  disguised 
Gwydion  so. 

**  Lord,"  said  Gwydion,  "  I  can  set  you  free  from 
your  promise.  Neither  give  me  the  swine  at  once, 
nor  yet  refuse  them  to  me  altogether,  and  to-morrow 
I  will  show  you  how." 

He  went  to  the  lodging  Pryderi  had  assigned  him, 
and  began  to  work  his  charms  and  illusions.  Out 
of  fungus  he  made  twelve  gilded  shields,  and  twelve 
horses  with  gold  harness,  and  twelve  black  grey- 
hounds with  white  breasts,  each  wearing  a  golden 
collar  and  leash.     And  these  he  showed  to  Pryderi. 

"Lord,"  said  he,  "there  is  a  release  from  the 
word  you  spoke  last  evening  concerning  the  swine 
— that  you  may  neither  give  them  nor  sell  them. 
You  may  exchange  them  for  something  which  is 
better.  I  will  give  you  these  twelve  horses  with 
their  gold  harness,  and  these  twelve  greyhounds 
with  their  gold  collars  and  leashes,  and  these  twelve 
gilded  shields  for  them." 

*  Said  to  have  been  at  Rhuddlan  Teivi,  which  is,  perhaps,  Glan  Teivy,  near 
Cardigan  Bridge. 


3IO         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Pryderi  took  counsel  with  his  men,  and  agreed 
to  the  bargain.  So  Gwydion  and  his  followers 
took  the  swine  and  went  away  with  them,  hurrying 
as  fast  as  they  could,  for  Gwydion  knew  that  the 
illusion  would  not  last  longer  than  a  day.  The 
memory  of  their  journey  was  long  kept  up;  every 
place  where  they  rested  between  Dyfed  and  Caer 
Dathyl  is  remembered  by  a  name  connecting  it  with 
pigs.  There  is  a  Mochdrev  ('*  Swine's  Town  ")  in 
each  of  the  three  counties  of  Cardiganshire,  Mont- 
gomeryshire, and  Denbighshire,  and  a  Castell  y 
Moch  (**  Swine's  Castle")  near  Mochnant  ("Swine's 
Brook  "),  which  runs  through  part  of  the  two  latter 
counties.  They  shut  up  the  pigs  in  safety,  and 
then  assembled  all  Math's  army;  for  the  horses  and 
hounds  and  shields  had  returned  to  fungus,  and 
Pryderi,  who  guessed  Gwydion's  part  in  it,  was 
coming  northward  in  hot  haste. 

There  were  two  battles — one  at  Maenor  Penardd, 
near  Conway,  and  the  other  at  Maenor  Alun,  now 
called  Coed  Helen,  near  Caernarvon.  Beaten  in 
both,  Pryderi  fell  back  upon  Nant  Call,  about  nine 
miles  from  Caernarvon.  Here  he  was  again  de- 
feated with  great  slaughter,  and  sent  hostages, 
asking  for  peace  and  a  safe  retreat. 

This  was  granted  by  Math;  but,  none  the  less, 
the  army  of  the  sons  of  Don  insisted  on  following 
the  retreating  host,  and  harassing  it.  So  Pryderi 
sent  a  complaint  to  Math,  demanding  that,  if  there 
must  still  be  war,  Gwydion,  who  had  caused  all  the 
trouble,  should  fight  with  him  in  single  combat. 

Gwydion  agreed,  and  the  champions  of  light  and 


GWYDION    CONQUERS    PRYDERl 

From  the  Draiving  by  E.  JVallcousim 


The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness     311 

darkness  met  face  to  face.  But  Pryderi  was  the 
waning  power,  and  he  fell  before  the  strength  and 
magic  of  Gwydion.  **  And  at  Maen  Tyriawc,  above 
Melenryd,  was  he  buried,  and  there  is  his  grave", 
says  the  Mabinogi,  though  the  ancient  Welsh  poem, 
called  the  **  Verses  of  the  Graves  of  the  Warriors  "\ 
assigns  him  a  different  resting-place.^ 

This  decisive  victory  over  Hades  and  its  kings 
was  the  end  of  the  struggle,  until  it  was  renewed, 
with  still  more  complete  success,  by  one  greater  than 
Gwydion — the  invincible  Arthur. 

1  Poem  XIX  in  the  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen,  Vol.  I,  p.  309,  of  Skene. 
■  "  In  Aber  Gwenoli  is  the  grave  of  Pryderi, 
Where  the  waves  beat  against  the  land." 


CHAPTER   XXI 

THE    MYTHOLOGICAL    "COMING   OF   ARTHUR*' 

The  ''Coming  of  Arthur",  his  sudden  rise  into 
prominence,  is  one  of  the  many  problems  of  the 
Celtic  mythology.  He  is  not  mentioned  in  any 
of  the  Four  Branches  of  the  Mabinogi,  which  deal 
with  the  races  of  British  gods  equivalent  to  the 
Gaelic  Tuatha  D6  Danann.  The  earliest  references 
to  him  in  Welsh  literature  seem  to  treat  him  as 
merely  a  warrior-chieftain,  no  better,  if  no  worse, 
than  several  others,  such  as  ''  Geraint,  a  tributary 
prince  of  Devon  ",  immortalized  both  by  the  bards ^ 
and  by  Tennyson.  Then,  following  upon  this,  we 
find  him  lifted  to  the  extraordinary  position  of  a 
king  of  gods,  to  whom  the  old  divine  families  of 
Don,  of  Llyr,  and  of  Pwyll  pay  unquestioned 
homage.  Triads  tell  us  that  Lludd — the  Zeus  of 
the  older  Pantheon — was  one  of  Arthur's  **  Three 
Chief  War-Knights  ",  and  Arawn,  King  of  Hades, 
one  of  his  '*  Three  Chief  Counselling  Knights  ".  In 
the  story  called  the  *'  Dream  of  Rhonabwy  ",  in  the 
Red  Book  of  Hergest,  he  is  shown  as  a  leader  to 
whom  are  subject  those  we  know  to  have  been  of 

1  A  poem  in  praise  of  Geraint,  "the  brave  man  from  the  region  of  Dyvnaint 
(Devon)  .  .  .  the  enemy  of  tyranny  and  oppression",  is  contained  in  both  the 
Black  Book  of  Caermarthen  and  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest.  '  *  When  Geraint  was 
bom,  open  were  the  gates  of  heaven  ",  begins  its  last  verse.  It  is  translated  in 
Vol.  I  of  Skene,  p.  267. 

312 


The  Mythological  *  *  Coming  of  A  rthur ' '    313 

divine  race — sons  of  Nudd,  of  Llyr,  of  Brin,  of 
Govannan,  and  of  Arianrod.  In  another  **  Red 
Book  "  tale,  that  of  **  Kulhwch  and  Olwen ",  even 
greater  gods  are  his  vassals.  Amaethon  son  of 
Don,  ploughs  for  him,  and  Govannan  son  of  D6n, 
rids  the  iron,  while  two  other  sons  of  Beli,  Nynniaw 
and  Peibaw,  **  turned  into  oxen  on  account  of  their 
sins",  toil  at  the  yoke,  that  a  mountain  may  be 
cleared  and  tilled  and  the  harvest  reaped  in  one  day. 
He  assembles  his  champions  to  seek  the  *'  treasures 
of  Britain " ;  and  Manawyddan  son  of  Llyr,  Gwyn 
son  of  Nudd,  and  Pryderi  son  of  Pwyll  rally  round 
him  at  his  call. 

The  most  probable,  and  only  adequate  explana- 
tion, is  given  by  Professor  Rhys,  who  considers 
that  the  fames  of  two  separate  Arthurs  have  been 
accidentally  confused,  to  the  exceeding  renown  of 
a  composite,  half-real,  half-mythical  personage  into 
whom  the  two  blended.^  One  of  these  was  a  divine 
Arthur,  a  god  more  or  less  widely  worshipped  in 
the  Celtic  world — the  same,  no  doubt,  whom  an 
ex  veto  inscription  found  in  south-eastern  France 
calls  Mercurius  Artaius}  The  other  was  a  human 
Arthur,  who  held  among  the  Britons  the  post  which, 
under  Roman  domination,  had  been  called  Comes 
BritannicB.  This  **  Count  of  Britain "  was  the 
supreme  military  authority;  he  had  a  roving  com- 
mission to  defend  the  country  against  foreign  in- 
vasion ;  and  under  his  orders  were  two  slightly 
subordinate  officers,  the  Dtix  Britanniarum.  (Duke 
of  the  Bri tains),  who  had  charge  of  the  northern 

1  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  8.  *  Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  40-41. 


314         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

wall,  and  the  Comes  Lit t oris  Saxonici  (Count  of 
the  Saxon  Shore),  who  guarded  the  south-eastern 
coasts.  The  Britons,  after  the  departure  of  the 
Romans,  long  kept  intact  the  organization  their 
conquerors  had  built  up;  and  it  seems  reasonable 
to  believe  that  this  post  of  leader  in  war  was  the 
same  which  early  Welsh  literature  describes  as  that 
of  "  emperor  ",  a  title  given  to  Arthur  alone  among 
the  British  heroes.*  The  fame  of  Arthur  the 
Emperor  blended  with  that  of  Arthur  the  God, 
so  that  it  became  conterminous  with  the  area  over 
which  we  have  traced  Brythonic  settlement  in  Great 
Britain.^  Hence  the  many  disputes,  ably,  if  un- 
profitably,  conducted,  over  ''  Arthurian  localities " 
and  the  sites  of  such  cities  as  Camelot,  and  of 
Arthurs  twelve  great  battles.  Historical  elements 
doubtless  coloured  the  tales  of  Arthur  and  his  com- 
panions, but  they  are  none  the  less  as  essentially 
mythic  as  those  told  of  their  Gaelic  analogues — 
the  Red  Branch  Heroes  of  Ulster  and  the  Fenians. 
Of  those  two  cycles,  it  is  with  the  latter  that  the 
Arthurian  legend  shows  most  affinity.^  Arthur's 
position  as  supreme  war-leader  of  Britain  curiously 
parallels  that  of  Finn's  as  general  of  a  **  native  Irish 
militia".  His  ''Round  Table"  of  warriors  also 
reminds  one  of  Finn's  Fenians  sworn  to  adventure. 
Both  alike  battle  with  human  and  superhuman  foes. 

^  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  7. 

2  "  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  fame  of  Arthur  is  widely  spread ;  he  is  claimed 
alike  as  a  prince  in  Brittany,  Cornwall,  Wales,  Cumberland,  and  the  Lowlands  of 
Scotland;  that  is  to  say,  his  fame  is  conterminous  with  the  Brythonic  race,  and 
does  not  extend  to  the  Gaels". — Chambers's  Encyclopaedia. 

3  For  Arthurian  and  Fenian  parallels  see  Campbell's  Popular  Tales  of  the  West 
Highlands. 


The  Mythological  *  ^  Coming  of  A  rthur  "    315 

Both  alike  harry  Europe,  even  to  the  walls  of  Rome. 
The  love-story  of  Arthur,  his  wife  Gwynhwyvar 
(Guinevere),  and  his  nephew  Medrawt  (Mordred), 
resembles  in  several  ways  that  of  Finn,  his  wife 
Grainne,  and  his  nephew  Diarmait.  In  the  stories 
of  the  last  battles  of  Arthur  and  of  the  Fenians,  the 
essence  of  the  kindred  myth  still  subsists,  though 
the  actual  exponents  of  it  slightly  differ.  At  the 
fight  of  Camlan,  it  was  Arthur  and  Medrawt  them- 
selves who  fought  the  final  duel.  But  in  the  last 
stand  of  the  Fenians  at  Gabhra,  the  original  prota- 
gonists have  given  place  to  their  descendants  and 
representatives.  Both  Finn  and  Cormac  were 
already  dead.  It  is  Oscar,  Finn's  grandson,  and 
Cairbre,  Cormac  s  son,  who  fight  and  slay  each 
other.  And  again,  just  as  Arthur  was  thought  by 
many  not  to  have  really  died,  but  to  have  passed 
to  ''  the  island  valley  of  Avilion ",  so  a  Scottish 
legend  tells  us  how,  ages  after  the  Fenians,  a 
man,  landing  by  chance  upon  a  mysterious  western 
island,  met  and  spoke  with  Finn  mac  Coul.  Even 
the  alternative  legend,  which  makes  Arthur  and 
his  warriors  wait  under  the  earth  in  a  magic  sleep 
for  the  return  of  their  triumph,  is  also  told  of  the 
Fenians. 

But  these  parallels,  though  they  illustrate  Arthur's 
pre-eminence,  do  not  show  his  real  place  among 
the  gods.  To  determine  this,  we  must  examine  the 
ranks  of  the  older  dynasties  carefully,  to  see  if  any 
are  missing  whose  attributes  this  new-comer  may 
have  inherited.  We  find  Lludd  and  Gwyn,  Arawn, 
Pryderi,  and  Manawyddan  side  by  side  with  him 


3i6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

under  their  own  names.  Among  the  children  of 
D6n  are  Amaethon  and  Govannan.  But  here  the 
list  stops,  with  a  notable  omission.  There  is  no 
mention,  in  later  myth,  of  Gwydion.  That  greatest 
of  the  sons  of  Don  has  fallen  out,  and  vanished 
without  a  sign. 

Singularly  enough,  too,  the  same  stories  that  were 
once  told  of  Gwydion  are  now  attached  to  the 
name  of  Arthur.  So  that  we  may  assume,  with 
Professor  Rhys,  that  Arthur,  the  prominent  god  of 
a  new  Pantheon,  has  taken  the  place  of  Gwydion 
in  the  old.^  A  comparison  of  Gwydion-myths  and 
Arthur-myths  shows  an  almost  exact  correspondence 
in  everything  but  name. 

Like  Gwydion,  Arthur  is  the  exponent  of  culture 
and  of  arts.  Therefore  we  see  him  carrying  on  the 
same  war  against  the  underworld  for  wealth  and 
wisdom  that  Gwydion  and  the  sons  of  Don  waged 
against  the  sons  of  Llyr,  the  Sea,  and  of  Pwyll,  the 
Head  of  Hades. 

Like  Gwydion,  too,  Arthur  suffered  early  reverses. 
He  failed,  indeed,  even  where  his  prototype  had 
succeeded.  Gwydion,  we  know  from  the  Mabinogi 
of  M^th,  successfully  stole  Pryderi's  pigs,  but  Arthur 
was  utterly  baffled  in  his  attempt  to  capture  the 
swine  of  a  similar  prince  of  the  underworld,  called 
March  son  of  Meirchion.^  Also  as  with  Gwydion, 
his  earliest  reconnaissance  of  Hades  was  disastrous, 


1  See  chap,  i  of  Rhys's  Arthurian  Legend— "  Arthvr,  Historical  and  Mythical". 

'  A  triad  in  the  Hengwrt  MS.  536,  translated  by  Skene,  It  was  Trystan  who  was 
watching  the  swine  for  his  uncle,  while  the  swineherd  went  with  a  message  to 
Essylt  (Iseult),  "and  Arthiir  desired  one  pig  by  deceit  or  by  theft,  and  could  not 
get  it" 


The  Mythological  *  *  Coming  of  A  rthur^^    317 

and  led  to  his  capture  and  imprisonment.  Manaw- 
yddan  son  of  Llyr,  confined  him  in  the  mysterious 
and  gruesome  bone-fortress  of  Oeth  and  Anoeth, 
and  there  he  languished  for  three  days  and  three 
nights  before  a  rescuer  came  in  the  person  of  Goreu, 
his  cousin.^  But,  in  the  end,  he  triumphed.  A 
Welsh  poem,  ascribed  to  the  bard  Taliesin,  relates, 
under  the  title  "  The  Spoiling  of  Annwn  ",*  an  ex- 
pedition of  Arthur  and  his  followers  into  the  very 
heart  of  that  country,  from  which  he  appears  to 
have  returned  (for  the  verses  are  somewhat  obscure) 
with  the  loss  of  almost  all  his  men,  but  in  possession 
of  the  object  of  his  quest — the  magic  cauldron  of 
inspiration  and  poetry. 

Taliesin  tells  the  story  as  an  eye-witness.  He 
may  well  have  done  so;  for  it  was  his  boast  that 
from  the  creation  of  the  world  he  had  allowed  him- 
self to  miss  no  event  of  importance.  He  was  in 
Heaven,  he  tells  us,^  when  Lucifer  fell,  and  in  the 
Court  of  Don  before  Gwydion  was  born;  he  had 
been  among  the  constellations  both  with  Mary 
Magdalene  and  with  the  pagan  goddess  Arianrod; 
he  carried  a  banner  before  Alexander,  and  was  chief 
director  of  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel;  he 
saw  the  fall  of  Troy  and  the  founding  of  Rome ;  he 
was  with  Noah  in  the  Ark,  and  he  witnessed  the 
destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah;  and  he  was 
present  both  at  the  Manger  of  Bethlehem  and  at 
the  Cross  of  Calvary.     But,  unfortunately,  Taliesin, 

1  See  note  to  chap,  xxii — "The  Treasures  of  Britain". 
'  Book  of  Taliesin,  poem  xxx,  Skene,  Vol.  I,  p.  256. 

'  In  a  probably  very  ancient  po«n  embedded  in  the  sixteenth-century  Welsh 
romance  called  Taliesin,  included  by  Lady  Guest  in  her  Mabinogion. 


3i8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

as  a  credible  personage,  rests  under  exactly  the  same 
disabilities  as  Arthur  himself.  It  is  not  denied  by 
scholars  that  there  was  a  real  Taliesin,  a  sixth- 
century  bard  to  whom  were  attributed,  and  who 
may  have  actually  composed,  some  of  the  poems  in 
the  Book  of  Taliesin.^  But  there  was  also  another 
Taliesin,  whom,  as  a  mythical  poet  of  the  British 
Celts,  Professor  Rhys  is  inclined  to  equate  with  the 
Gaelic  Ossian.^  The  traditions  of  the  two  mingled, 
endowing  the  historic  Taliesin  with  the  god-like  attri- 
butes of  his  predecessor,  and  clothing  the  mythical 
Taliesin  with  some  of  the  actuality  of  his  successor.^ 
It  is  regrettable  that  our  bard  did  not  at  times 
sing  a  little  less  incoherently,  for  his  poem  contains 
the  fullest  description  that  has  come  down  to  us  of 
the  other  world  as  the  Britons  conceived  it.  Appa- 
rently the  numerous  names,  all  different  and  some 
now  untranslatable,  refer  to  the  same  place,  and 
they  must  be  collated  to  form  a  right  idea  of  what 
Annwn  was  like.  With  the  exception  of  an  obviously 
spurious  last  verse,  here  omitted,  the  poem  is  mag- 
nificently pagan,  and  quite  a  storehouse  of  British 
mythology*. 

1  "  The  existence  of  a  sixth-century  bard  of  this  name,  a  contemporary  of  the 
heroic  stage  of  British  resistance  to  the  Germanic  invaders,  is  well  attested.  A 
number  of  poems  are  found  in  mediaeval  Welsh  MSS.,  chief  among  them  the  so- 
called  Book  of  Taliesin^  ascribed  to  this  sixth-century  poet.  Some  of  these  are 
almost  as  old  as  any  remains  of  Welsh  poetry,  and  may  go  back  to  the  early  tenth 
or  the  ninth  century ;  others  are  productions  of  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  even 
thirteenth  centuries."  —  Nutt:  Notes  to  his  (1902)  edition  of  Lady  Guest's 
Mabinogion. 

2  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  551. 

8  ' '  There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  the  sixth-century  bard  succeeded  to  the 
form  and  attributes  of  a  far  older,  a  prehistoric,  a  mythic  singer." — Nutt:  Notes 
to  Mabinogion. 

*  I  have  been  obliged  to  collate  four  different  translators  to  obtain  an  acceptable 
version  of  what  Mr.  T.  Stephens,  in  his  Literature  of  the  Kyntri,  calls  "one  of  the 


The  Mythological  ^^  Coming  of  Arthur  '     319 

"  I  will  praise  the  Sovereign,  supreme  Lord  of  the  land, 
Who  hath  extended  his  dominion  over  the  shore  of  the 

world. 
Stout  was  the  prison  of  Gweir\  in  Caer  Sidi, 
Through  the  spite  of  Pwyll  and  Pryderi : 
No  one  before  him  went  into  it. 
The  heavy  blue  chain  firmly  held  the  youth, 
And  before  the  spoils  of  Annwn  woefully  he  sang. 
And  thenceforth  till  doom  he  shall  remain  a  bard. 
Thrice  enough  to  fill  Prydwen^  we  went  into  it; 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Sidi^. 

"  Am  I  not  a  candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  song 
In  Caer  Pedryvan*,  four  times  revolving? 
The  first  word  from  the  cauldron,  when  was  it  spoken? 
By  the  breath  of  nine  maidens  it  was  gently  warmed. 
Is  it  not  the  cauldron  of  the  chief  of  Annwn?     What  is 

its  fashion? 
A  rim  of  pearls  is  round  its  edge. 
It  will  not  cook  the  food  of  a  coward  or  one  forsworn. 
A  sword  flashing  bright  will  be  raised  to  him, 
And  left  in  the  hand  of  Lleminawg. 
And  before  the  door  of  the  gate  of  Ufifern^  the  lamp  was 

burning. 
When  we  went  with  Arthur — a  splendid  labour! — 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Vedwyd^. 

"  Am  I  not  a  candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  song 
In  Caer  Pedryvan,  in  the  Isle  of  the  Strong  Door, 
Where  twilight  and  pitchy  darkness  meet  together. 
And  bright  wine  is  the  drink  of  the  host? 
Thrice  enough  to  fill  Prydwen  we  went  on  the  sea. 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Rigor^. 

least  intelligible  of  the  mythological  poems".     My  authorities  have  been  Skene, 
Stephens,  Nash,  and  Rhys.  *  A  form  of  the  name  Gwydion. 

"^  The  name  of  Arthur's  ship.  '  Revolving  Castle. 

*  Four-cornered  Castle.  *  The  Cold  Place. 

6  Castle  of  Revelry.  7  Kingly  Castle. 


320         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

"  I  will  not  allow  much  praise  to  the  leaders  of  literature. 
Beyond    Caer   Wydyr^   they   saw   not    the   prowess   of 

Arthur; 
Three-score  hundreds  stood  on  the  walls; 
It  was  hard  to  converse  with  their  watchman. 
Thrice  enough  to  fill  Prydwen  we  went  with  Arthur; 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Golud^. 

"  I  will  not  allow  much  praise  to  the  spiritless. 
They  know  not  on  what  day,  or  who  caused  it, 
Or  in  what  hour  of  the  serene  day  Cwy  was  born, 
Or  who  caused  that  he  should  not  go  to  the  dales  of 

Devwy. 
They  know  not  the  brindled  ox  with  the  broad  head- 
band. 
Whose  yoke  is  seven-score  handbreadths. 
When  we  went  with  Arthur,  of  mournful  memory, 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Vandwy^ 

"  I  will  not  allow  much  praise  to  those  of  drooping  courage. 
They  know  not  on  what  day  the  chief  arose. 
Nor  in  what  hour  of  the  serene  day  the  owner  was  born, 
Nor  what  animal  they  keep,  with  its  head  of  silver. 
When  we  went  with  Arthur,  of  anxious  striving. 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Ochren*". 

Many  of  the  allusions  of  this  poem  will  perhaps 
never  be  explained.  We  know  no  better  than  the 
**  leaders  of  literature"  whom  the  vainglorious  Tali- 
esin  taunted  with  their  ignorance  and  lack  of  spirit 
in  what  hour  Cwy  was  born,  or  even  who  he  was, 
much  less  who  prevented  him  from  going  to  the 
dales  of  Devwy,  wherever  they  may  have  been. 
We  are  in  the  dark  as  much  as  they  were  with 

*  Glass  Castle.  •  Castle  of  Riches. 

»  Meaning  is  unknown.     Sec  chap,  xvi — "The  Gods  of  the  Britons". 

*  Meaning  is  unknown.  See  chap.  XX — "The  Victories  of  Light  over  Darkness", 


The  Mythological  ^^  Coming  of  Arthur''     321 

regard  to  the  significance  of  the  brindled  ox  with 
the  broad  head-band,  and  of  the  other  animal  with 
the  silver  head.^  But  the  earlier  portion  of  the 
poem  is,  fortunately,  clearer,  and  it  gives  glimpses 
of  a  grandeur  of  savage  imagination.  The  strong- 
doored,  foursquare  fortress  of  glass,  manned  by  its 
dumb,  ghostly  sentinels,  spun  round  in  never-ceasing 
revolution,  so  that  few  could  find  its  entrance;  it 
was  pitch-dark  save  for  the  twilight  made  by  the 
lamp  burning  before  its  circling  gate;  feasting  went 
on  there,  and  revelry,  and  in  its  centre,  choicest  of 
its  many  riches,  was  the  pearl-rimmed  cauldron  of 
poetry  and  inspiration,  kept  bubbling  by  the  breaths 
of  nine  British  pythonesses,  so  that  it  might  give 
forth  its  oracles.  To  this  scanty  information  we 
may  add  a  few  lines,  also  by  Taliesin,  and  contained 
in  a  poem  called  **  A  Song  Concerning  the  Sons 
of  Llyr  ab  Brochwel  Powys": — 

"  Perfect  is  my  chair  in  Caer  Sidi : 
Plague  and  age  hurt  not  him  who 's  in  it — 
They  know,  Manawyddan  and  Pryderi. 
Three  organs  round  a  fire  sing  before  it, 
And  about  its  points  are  ocean's  streams 
And  the  abundant  well  above  it — 
Sweeter  than  white  wine  the  drink  in  it."^ 

Little  is,  however,  added  by  it  to  our  knowledge. 
It  reminds  us  that  Annwn  was  surrounded  by  the 
sea — "the  heavy  blue  chain"  which  held  Gweir  so 
firmly; — it  informs  us  that  the  **  bright  wine"  which— 

1  Unless  they  should  be  "the  yellow  and  the  brindled  bull"  mentioned  in  the 
story  of  Kulhwch  and  Olwen. 
3  Book  of  Taliesin,  poem  XIV.     The  translation  is  by  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend, 

p.  301- 

(B219)  X 


322         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

was  **the  drink  of  the  host"  was  kept  in  a  well;  it 
adds  to  the  revelry  the  singing  of  the  three  organs; 
it  makes  a  point  that  its  inhabitants  were  freed  from 
age  and  death;  and,  last  of  all,  it  shows  us,  as  we 
might  have  expected,  the  ubiquitous  Taliesin  as  a 
privileged  resident  of  this  delightful  region.  We 
have  two  clues  as  to  where  the  country  may  have 
been  situated.  Lundy  Island,  off  the  coast  of 
Devonshire,  was  anciently  called  Ynys  Wair,  the 
**  Island  of  Gweir",  or  Gwydion.  The  Welsh  trans- 
lation of  the  Seint  Grealy  an  Anglo-Norman  romance 
embodying  much  of  the  old  mythology,  locates  its 
**  Turning  Castle" — evidently  the  same  as  Caer  Sidi 
— in  the  district  around  and  comprising  Puffin  Island 
off  the  coast  of  Anglesey.^  But  these  are  slender 
threads  by  which  to  tether  to  firm  ground  a  realm  of 
the  imagination. 

With  Gwydion,  too,  have  disappeared  the  whole 
of  the  characters  connected  with  him  in  that  portion 
of  the  Mabinogi  of  Math,  Son  of  Mathonwy,  which 
recounts  the  myth  of  the  birth  of  the  sun-god. 
Neither  Math  himself,  nor  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes,  nor 
Dylan,  nor  their  mother,  Arianrod,  play  any  more 
part;  they  have  vanished  as  completely  as  Gwydion. 
But  the  essence  of  the  myth  of  which  they  were  the 
figures  remains  intact.  Gwydion  was  the  father  by 
his  sister  Arianrod,  wife  of  a  waning  heaven-god 
called  Nwyvre  (Space),  of  twin  sons.  Lieu,  a  god 
of  light,  and  Dylan,  a  god  of  darkness ;  and  we  find 
this  same  story  woven  into  the  very  innermost  tex- 
ture of  the  legend  of  Arthur.*^     The  new  Arianrod, 

*  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  325.  ^  Rhys:  ibid.,  chap.  i. 


The  Mythological  *  *  Coming  of  A  rthur  '     323 

though  called  "Morgawse"  by  Sir  Thomas  Malory\ 
and  *'  Anna"  by  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth^,  is  known 
to  earlier  Welsh  myth  as  *'Gwyar"^  She  was  the 
sister  of  Arthur  and  the  wife  of  the  sky-god,  Lludd, 
and  her  name,  which  means  **  shed  blood"  or  *'  gore", 
reminds  us  of  the  relationship  of  the  Morrfgii,  the 
war-goddess  of  the  Gaels,  to  the  heaven-god  Nuada*. 
The  new  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes  is  called  Gwalchmei,  that 
is,  the  *'  Falcon  of  May"^  and  the  new  Dylan  is 
Medrawt,  at  once  Arthurs  son  and  Gwalchmeis 
brother,  and  the  bitterest  enemy  of  both^ 

Besides  these  **  old  friends  with  new  faces",  Arthur 
brings  with  him  into  prominence  a  fresh  Pantheon, 
most  of  whom  also  replace  the  older  gods  of  the 
heavens  and  earth  and  the  regions  under  the  earth. 
The  Zeus  of  Arthur's  cycle  is  called  Myrddin,  who 
passed  into  the  Norman- French  romances  as  ''Mer- 
lin". All  the  myths  told  of  him  bear  witness  to  his 
high  estate.  The  first  name  of  Britain,  before  it 
was  inhabited,  was,  we  learn  from  a  triad,  Clas 
Myrddin,  that  is,  **  Myrddin's  Enclosure"/  He  is 
given  a  wife  whose  attributes  recall  those  of  the 
consorts  of  Nuada  and  Lludd.  She  is  described  as 
the  only  daughter  of  Coel — the  British  name  of  the 
Gaulish  Camulus,  a  god  of  war  and  the  sky — and 
was  called  Elen  Lwyddawg,  that  is,  *'  Elen,  Leader 
of  Hosts".  Her  memory  is  still  preserved  in  Wales 
in  connection  with  ancient  roadways;    such  names 

*  Malory's  Af(?r/«  Darthur,  Book  II,  chap.  ii. 

'  Historia  Britonum,  Book  VIII,  chap.  XX. 

3  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  169.  *  Rhys:  ibid.,  p  169. 

°  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  13.  •  Rhys:  ibid.,  pp.  19-23. 

^  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  168. 


324         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

as  Ffordd  Elen  (**  Elen's  Road")  and  Sam  Elen 
(**  Elen  s  Causeway")  seem  to  show  that  the  paths 
on  which  armies  marched  were  ascribed  or  dedicated 
to  her.^  As  Myrddin's  wife,  she  is  credited  with 
having  founded  the  town  of  Carmarthen  (Caer 
Myrddin),  as  well  as  the  '*  highest  fortress  in  Arvon", 
which  must  have  been  the  site  near  Beddgelert  still 
called  Dinas  Entry s,  the  **  Town  of  Emrys",  one  of 
Myrddin's  epithets  or  names.^ 

Professor  Rhys  is  inclined  to  credit  Myrddin,  or, 
rather,  the  British  Zeus  under  whatever  name,  with 
having  been  the  god  especially  worshipped  at  Stone- 
henge.^  Certainly  this  impressive  temple,  ever 
unroofed  and  open  to  the  sun  and  wind  and  rain  of 
heaven,  would  seem  peculiarly  appropriate  to  a 
British  supreme  god  of  light  and  sky.  Neither  are 
we  quite  without  documentary  evidence  which  will 
allow  us  to  connect  it  with  him.  Geoffrey  of  Mon- 
mouth^  whose  historical  fictions  usually  conceal 
mythological  facts,  relates  that  the  stones  which  com- 
pose it  were  erected  by  Merlin.  Before  that,  they 
had  stood  in  Ireland,  upon  a  hill  which  Geoffrey 
calls  ''  Mount  Killaraus",  and  which  can  be  identified 
as  the  same  spot  known  to  Irish  legend  as  the  "Hill 
of  Uisnech",  and,  still  earlier,  connected  with  Balor. 
According  to  British  tradition,  the  primeval  giants 
who  first  colonized  Ireland  had  brought  them  from 
their  original  home  on  *'the  farthest  coast  of  Africa", 

*  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  167. 

2  See  Rhys's  exposition  of  the  mythological  meaning  of  the  Red  Book  romance 
of  the  Dream  of  Maxen  Wledig,  in  his  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  160-175. 

3  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  192-195. 

*  Historia  Britonum,  Book  VIH,  chaps,  ix-xil. 


The  Mythological  *  *  Coming  of  A  rthur "     325 

on  account  of  their  miraculous  virtues ;  for  any  water 
in  which  they  were  bathed  became  a  sovereign 
remedy  either  for  sickness  or  for  wounds.  By  the 
order  of  Aurelius,  a  half- real,  half-mythical  king  of 
Britain,  Merlin  brought  them  thence  to  England, 
to  be  set  up  on  Salisbury  Plain  as  a  monument  to 
the  British  chieftains  treacherously  slain  by  Hengist 
and  his  Saxons.  With  this  scrap  of  native  informa- 
tion about  Stonehenge  we  may  compare  the  only 
other  piece  we  have — the  account  of  the  classic 
Diodorus,  who  called  it  a  temple  of  Apollo.^  At 
first,  these  two  statements  seem  to  conflict.  But  it 
is  far  from  unlikely  that  the  earlier  Celtic  settlers  in 
Britain  made  little  or  no  religious  distinction  between 
sky  and  sun.  The  sun-god,  as  a  separate  personage, 
seems  to  have  been  the  conception  of  a  comparatively 
late  age.  Celtic  mythology  allows  us  to  be  present, 
as  it  were,  at  the  births  both  of  the  Gaelic  Lugh 
Lamhfada  and  the  British  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes. 

Even  the  well-known  story  of  Myrddin's,  or  Mer- 
lin's final  imprisonment  in  a  tomb  of  airy  enchant- 
ment— **a  tour  withouten  walles,  or  withoute  eny 
closure  " — reads  marvellously  like  a  myth  of  the  sun 
**  with  all  his  fires  and  travelling  glories  round 
him  ".^  Encircled,  shielded,  and  made  splendid  by 
his  atmosphere  of  living  light,  the  Lord  of  Heaven 
moves  slowly  towards  the  west,  to  disappear  at  last 
into  the  sea  (as  one  local  version  of  the  myth  puts 
it),  or  on  to  a  far-off  island  (as  another  says),  or  into 
a  dark  forest  (the  choice  of  a  third).^     When  the 

1  See  chap,  iv  and  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  194. 

*Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  158,  159.  ^Ibid.^  p.  155. 


326         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

myth  became  iSnally  fixed,  it  was  Bardsey  Island,  off 
the  extreme  westernmost  point  of  Caernarvonshire, 
that  was  selected  as  his  last  abode.  Into  it  he 
went  with  nine  attendant  bards,  taking  with  him 
the  **  Thirteen  Treasures  of  Britain ",  thenceforth 
lost  to  men.  Bardsey  Island  no  doubt  derives  its 
name  from  this  story;  and  what  is  probably  an 
allusion  to  it  is  found  in  a  first-century  Greek  writer 
called  Plutarch,  who  describes  a  grammarian  called 
Demetrius  as  having  visited  Britain,  and  brought 
home  an  account  of  his  travels.  He  mentioned 
several  uninhabited  and  sacred  islands  off  our  coasts 
which  he  said  were  named  after  gods  and  heroes, 
but  there  was  one  especially  in  which  Cronos  was 
imprisoned  with  his  attendant  deities,  and  Briareus 
keeping  watch  over  him  as  he  slept;  **  for  sleep  was 
the  bond  forged  for  him".^  Doubtless  this  disin- 
herited deity,  whom  the  Greek,  after  his  fashion,  called 
**  Cronos",  was  the  British  heaven-  and  sun -god, 
after  he  had  descended  into  the  prison  of  the  west. 
Among  other  new-comers  is  Kai,  who,  as  Sir 
Kay  the  Seneschal,  fills  so  large  a  part  in  the  later 
romances.  Purged  of  his  worst  offences,  and  re- 
duced to  a  surly  butler  to  Arthur,  he  is  but  a 
shadow  of  the  earlier  Kai  who  murdered  Arthur  s 
son  Llacheu^  and  can  only  be  acquitted,  through 
the  obscurity  of  the  poem  that  relates  the  incident, 
of  having  also  carried  off,  or  having  tried  to  carry 
off,  Arthur's  wife,  Gwynhwyvar.^      He  is  thought 

1  Plutarch :  De  Defectu  Oraculorum.  | 

2 The  Seint  Greal,  quoted  by  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  61-62. 
*Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  59. 


The  Mythological  ^  *  Com ing  of  A  rthur  "     327 

to  have  been  a  personification  of  fire/  upon  the 
strength  of  a  description  given  of  him  in  the  mythi- 
cal romance  of  "  Kulhwch  and  Olwen  ".  **  Very 
subtle",  it  says,  **was  Kai.  When  it  pleased  him 
he  could  render  himself  as  tall  as  the  highest  tree 
in  the  forest.  And  he  had  another  peculiarity — so 
great  was  the  heat  of  his  nature,  that,  when  it 
rained  hardest,  whatever  he  carried  remained  dry 
for  a  handbreadth  above  and  a  handbreadth  below 
his  hand;  and  when  his  companions  were  coldest, 
it  was  to  them  as  fuel  with  which  to  light  their 
fire." 

Another  personage  who  owes  his  prominence  in 
the  Arthurian  story  to  his  importance  in  Celtic 
myth  was  March  son  of  Meirchion,  whose  swine 
Arthur  attempted  to  steal,  as  Gwydion  had  done 
those  of  Pryderi.  In  the  romances,  he  has  become 
the  cowardly  and  treacherous  Mark,  king,  accord- 
ing to  some  stories,  of  Cornwall,  but  according  to 
others,  of  the  whole  of  Britain,  and  known  to  all  as 
the  husband  of  the  Fair  Isoult,  and  the  uncle  of 
Sir  Tristrem.  But  as  a  deformed  deity  of  the 
underworld^  he  can  be  found  in  Gaelic  as  well  as  in 
British  myth.  He  cannot  be  considered  as  origi- 
nally different  from  More,  a  king  of  the  Fomors  at 
the  time  when  from  their  Glass  Castle  they  so 
fatally  oppressed  the  Children  of  Nemed.^  The 
Fomors  were  distinguished  by  their  animal  features, 
and  March  had  the  same  peculiarity.*     When  Sir 


1  Elton :  Origins  of  English  History,  p.  269. 

*  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  i2.  '  Ibid.,  p.  7a 

*The  name  March  means  "horse". 


328         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Thomas  Malory  relates  how,  to  please  Arthur  and 
Sir  Launcelot,  Sir  Dinadan  made  a  song  about 
Mark,  **  which  was  the  worst  lay  that  ever  harper 
sang  with  harp  or  any  other  instruments  'V  he  does 
not  tell  us  wherein  the  sting  of  the  lampoon  lay.  It 
no  doubt  reminded  King  Mark  of  the  unpleasant 
fact  that  he  had — not  like  his  Phrygian  counterpart, 
ass's  but — horse's  ears.  He  was,  in  fact,  a  Celtic 
Midas,  a  distinction  which  he  shared  with  one  of 
the  mythical  kings  of  early  Ireland.^ 

Neither  can  we  pass  over  Urien,  a  deity  of  the 
underworld  akin  to,  or  perhaps  the  same  as.  Bran.* 
Like  that  son  of  Llyr,  he  was  at  once  a  god  of 
battle  and  of  minstrelsy;*  he  was  adored  by  the 
bards  as  their  patron;^  his  badge  was  the  raven 
{bran,  in  Welsh)  ;^  while,  to  make  his  identification 
complete,  there  is  an  extant  poem  which  tells  how 
Urien,  wounded,  ordered  his  own  head  to  be  cut  off 
by  his  attendants.^  His  wife  was  Modron,^  known 
as  the  mother  of  Mabon,  the  sun -god  to  whom 
inscriptions  exist  as  Maponos.  Another  of  the 
children  of  Urien  and  Modron  is  Owain,  which  was 
perhaps  only  another  name  for  Mabon.^  Taliesin 
calls  him  "chief  of  the  glittering  west",^°  and  he  is 
as  certainly  a  sun-god  as  his  father  Urien,  **lord  of 
the  evening"/^  was  a  ruler  of  the  dark  underworld. 


1  Morte  Darthur.     Book  X,  chap,  xxvii.  ^  Called  Labraid  Longsech. 

8 Rhys :  Arthurian  Legend.     See  chap,  xi — "Urien  and  his  Congeners ". 

*  Ibid.,  p.  26c.  '  Ibid.^  p.  261.  ®  Ibid.^  p.  256. 

^  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  XH.     Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  253-256. 

®  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  247.  •  Ibid. 

^®  The  Death-song  of  Owain.     Taliesin,  XLiv,  Skene,  Vol.  I,  p.  366. 

^^Book  of  Taliesin,   xxxii.      Skene,   however,   translates  the  word  rendered 

evening"  by  Rhys  as  "cultivated  plain". 


The  Mythological  ^^  Coming  of  Arthur  '     329 

It  is  by  reason  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Arthur  that 
we  find  gathered  round  him  so  many  gods,  all 
probably  various  tribal  personifications  of  the  same 
few  mythological  ideas.  The  Celts,  both  of  the 
Gaelic  and  the  British  branches,  were  split  up  into 
numerous  petty  tribes,  each  with  its  own  local 
deities  embodying  the  same  essential  conceptions 
under  different  names.  There  was  the  god  of  the 
underworld,  gigantic  in  figure,  patron  alike  of 
warrior  and  minstrel,  teacher  of  the  arts  of  elo- 
quence and  literature,  and  owner  of  boundless 
wealth,  whom  some  of  the  British  tribes  worshipped 
as  Brdn,  others  as  Urien,  others  as  Pwyll,  or  March, 
or  Math,  or  Arawn,  or  Ogyrvran.  There  was  the 
lord  of  an  elysium — Hades  in  its  aspect  of  a  para- 
dise of  the  departed  rather  than  of  the  primeval 
subterranean  realm  where  all  things  originated — 
whom  the  Britons  of  Wales  called  Gwyn,  or  Gwyn- 
was;  the  Britons  of  Cornwall,  Melwas;  and  the 
Britons  of  Somerset,  Avallon,  or  Avallach.  Under 
this  last  title,  his  realm  is  called  Ynys  Avallon^ 
**  Avallon's  Island ",  or,  as  we  know  the  word, 
Avilion.  It  was  said  to  be  in  the  "  Land  of  Summer", 
which,  in  the  earliest  myth,  signified  Hades;  and  it 
was  only  in  later  days  that  the  mystic  Isle  of 
Avilion  became  fixed  to  earth  as  Glastonbury,  and 
the  Elysian  "Land  of  Summer"  as  Somerset.^ 
There  was  a  mighty  ruler  of  heaven,  a  **god  of 
battles  ",  worshipped  on  high  places,  in  whose  hands 
was  **  the  stern  arbitrament  of  war";  some  knew 
him  as   Lludd,   others  as   Myrddin,   or  as   Emrys. 

^  Rhys :  Arthurian  Legend^  p.  345. 


330         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

There  was  a  gentler  deity,  friendly  to  man,  to  help 
whom  he  fought  or  cajoled  the  powers  of  the  under- 
world; Gwydion  he  was  called,  and  Arthur.  Last, 
perhaps,  to  be  imagined  in  concrete  shape,  there 
was  a  long-armed,  sharp-speared  sun-god  who  aided 
the  culture-god  in  his  work,  and  was  known  as  Lieu, 
or  Gwalchmei,  or  Mabon,  or  Owain,  or  Peredur, 
and  no  doubt  by  many  another  name;  and  with  him 
is  usually  found  a  brother  representing  not  light, 
but  darkness.  This  expression  of  a  single  idea  by 
different  names  may  be  also  observed  in  Gaelic 
myth,  though  not  quite  so  clearly.  In  the  hurtling 
of  clan  against  clan,  many  such  divinities  perished 
altogether  out  of  memory,  or  survived  only  as  names, 
to  make  up,  in  Ireland,  the  vast,  shadowy  population 
claiming  to  be  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  and,  in  Britain, 
the  long  list  of  Arthur's  followers.  Others — gods 
of  stronger  communities — would  increase  their  fame 
as  their  worshippers  increased  their  territory,  until, 
as  happened  in  Greece,  the  chief  deities  of  many 
tribes  came  together  to  form  a  national  Pantheon. 

We  have  already  tried  to  explain  the  '*  Coming 
of  Arthur"  historically.  Mythologically,  he  came, 
as,  according  to  Celtic  ideas,  all  things  came  origi- 
nally, from  the  underworld.  His  father  is  called 
Uther  Pendragon.^  But  Uther  Pendragon  is  (for 
the  word  ''  dragon "  is  not  part  of  the  name,  but 
a  title  signifying  **  war-leader  ")  Uther  Ben,  that  is, 
Bran,  under  his  name  of  the  **  Wonderful  Head",* 
so   that,    in   spite   of   the    legend   which   describes 

^  Both  by  Malory  and  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth. 
*Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend^  p.  256. 


The  Mythological  *  ^  Coming  of  A  rthur "     331 

Arthur  as  having  disinterred  Bran's  head  on  Tower 
Hill,  where  it  watched  against  invasion,  because  he 
thought  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  keep  Britain  in 
any  other  way  than  by  valour,^  we  must  recognize 
the  King  of  Hades  as  his  father.  This  being  so,  it 
would  only  be  natural  that  he  should  take  a  wife 
from  the  same  eternal  country,  and  we  need  not 
be  surprised  to  find  in  Gwynhwyvar's  father,  Ogyr- 
vran,  a  personage  corresponding  in  all  respects  to 
the  Celtic  conception  of  the  ruler  of  the  underworld. 
He  was  of  gigantic  size;^  he  was  the  owner  of  a 
cauldron  out  of  which  three  Muses  had  been  born;' 
and  he  was  the  patron  of  the  bards,*  who  deemed 
him  to  have  been  the  originator  of  their  art.  More 
than  this,  his  very  name,  analysed  into  its  original 
ocur  vran,  means  the  evil  bran^  or  raven,  the  bird 
of  death.  ^ 

But  Welsh  tradition  credits  Arthur  with  three 
wives,  each  of  them  called  Gwynhwyvar.  This 
peculiar  arrangement  is  probably  due  to  the  Celtic 
love  of  triads;  and  one  may  compare  them  with  the 
three  E tains  who  pass  through  the  mythico-heroic 
story  of  Eochaid  Airem,  Etain,  and  Mider.  Of 
these  three  Gwynhwyvars,^  besides  the  Gwynhwy- 
var, daughter  of  Ogyrvran,  one  was  the  daughter  of 
Gwyrd  Gwent,  of  whom  we  know  nothing  but  the 
name,    and   the   other   of  Gwyrthur   ap   Greidawl, 

1  See  chap,  xviii— "  The  Wooing  of  Branwen  and  the  Beheading  of  Br^n  ". 

2  He  is  called  Ogyrvran  the  Giant.  ^Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  326. 
*  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  268-269. 

'  Rhys :  Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology,  p.  306.  But  the  derivation  is  only  tenta- 
tive, and  an  interesting  alternative  one  is  given,  which  equates  him  with  the  Persian 
Ahriman. 

<»  The  enumeration  of  Arthur's  three  Gwynhwyvars  forms  one  of  the  Welsh  triads. 


^;^2         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  same  ** Victor  son  of  Scorcher"  with  whom 
Gwyn  son  of  Nudd,  fought,  in  earlier  myth,  per- 
petual battle  for  the  possession  of  Creudylad, 
daughter  of  the  sky-god  Lludd.  This  same  eternal 
strife  between  the  powers  of  light  and  darkness  for 
the  possession  of  a  symbolical  damsel  is  waged 
again  in  the  Arthurian  cycle;  but  it  is  no  longer  for 
Creudylad  that  Gwyn  contends,  but  for  Gwynhwy- 
var,  and  no  longer  with  Gwyrthur,  but  with  Arthur. 
It  would  seem  to  have  been  a  Cornish  form  of 
the  myth;  for  the  dark  god  is  called  *'Melwas", 
and  not  "  Gwyn  was ",  or  **  Gwyn ",  his  name  in 
Welsh.  ^  Mel  was  lay  in  ambush  for  a  whole  year, 
and  finally  succeeded  in  carrying  off  Gwynhwyvar 
to  his  palace  in  Avilion.  But  Arthur  pursued,  and 
besieged  that  stronghold,  just  as  Eochaid  Airem 
had,  in  the  Gaelic  version  of  the  universal  story, 
mined  and  sapped  at  Miders  sidh  of  Bri  Leith.^ 
Mythology,  as  well  as  history,  repeats  itself;  and 
Melwas  was  obliged  to  restore  Gwynhwyvar  to  her 
rightful  lord. 

It  is  not  Melwas,  however,  that  in  the  best- 
known  versions  of  the  story  contends  with  Arthur 
for  the  love  of  Gwynhwyvar.  The  most  wide- 
spread early  tradition  makes  Arthur's  rival  his 
nephew  Medrawt.  Here  Professor  Rhys  traces 
a  striking  parallel  between  the  British  legend  of 
Arthur,  Gwynhwyvar,  and  Medrawt,  and  the  Gaelic 
story  of  Airem,  Etain,  and  Mider.^  The  two  myths 
are  practically  counterparts;    for  the  names  of  all 

1  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p,  342,         -  See  chap.  XI — "  The  Gods  in  Exile". 
'  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  chap,  ii—"  Arthur  and  Airem". 


The  Mythological  ^  *  Coming  of  A  rthur^     333 

the  three  pairs  agree  in  their  essential  meaning. 
**Airem",  like  **  Arthur",  signifies  the  '*  Plough- 
man ",  the  divine  institutor  of  agriculture;  '*  Etain  ", 
the  "  Shining  One  ",  is  a  fit  parallel  to  ''  Gwynhwy- 
var",  the  **  White  Apparition";  while  **Mider"  and 
**  Medrawt "  both  come  from  the  same  root,  a  word 
meaning  "  to  hit ",  either  literally,  or  else  metaphori- 
cally, with  the  mind,  in  the  sense  of  coming  to  a 
decision.  To  attempt  to  explain  this  myth  is  to 
raise  the  vexed  question  of  the  meaning  of  myth- 
ology. Is  it  day  and  dark  that  strive  for  dawn,  or 
summer  and  winter  for  the  lovely  spring,  or  does  it 
shadow  forth  the  rescue  of  the  grain  that  makes 
man  s  life  from  the  devouring  underworld  by  the 
farmer's  wit?  When  this  can  be  finally  resolved,  a 
multitude  of  Celtic  myths  will  be  explained.  Every- 
where arise  the  same  combatants  for  the  stolen 
bride;  one  has  the  attributes  of  light,  the  other  is 
a  champion  of  darkness. 

Even  in  Sir  Thomas  Malory's  version  of  the 
Arthurian  story,  taken  by  him  from  French  ro- 
mances far  removed  from  the  original  tradition, 
we  find  the  myth  subsisting.  Medrawt's  original 
place  as  the  lover  of  Arthur's  queen  had  been 
taken  in  the  romances  by  Sir  Launcelot,  who,  if  he 
was  not  some  now  undiscoverable  Celtic  god,^  must 
have  been  an  invention  of  the  Norman  adapters. 
But  the  story  which  makes  Medrawt  Arthur's  rival 

*  In  the  mysterious  Lancelot,  not  found  in  Arthurian  story  before  the  Norman 
adaptations  of  it,  Professor  Rhys  is  incUned  to  see  a  British  sun-god,  or  solar  hero. 
A  number  of  interesting  comparisons  are  drawn  between  him  and  the  Peredur  and 
Owain  of  the  later  "Mabinogion"  tales,  as  well  as  with  the  Gaelic  Cuchulainn. 
See  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend. 


334         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

has  been  preserved  in  the  account  of  how  Sir 
Mordred  would  have  wedded  Guinevere  by  force, 
as  part  of  the  rebellion  which  he  made  against  his 
king  and  uncle.  ^  This  strife  was  Celtic  myth  long 
before  it  became  part  of  the  pseudo-history  of  early 
Britain.  The  triads^  tell  us  how  Arthur  and  Me- 
drawt  raided  each  other's  courts  during  the  owner's 
absence.  Medrawt  went  to  Kelli  Wic,  in  Cornwall, 
ate  and  drank  everything  he  could  find  there,  and 
insulted  Queen  Gwynhwyvar,  in  revenge  for  which 
Arthur  went  to  Medrawt's  court  and  killed  man 
and  beast.  Their  struggle  only  ended  with  the 
Battle  of  Camlan ;  and  that  mythical  combat,  which 
chroniclers  have  striven  to  make  historical,  is  full 
of  legendary  detail.  Tradition  tells  how  Arthur 
and  his  antagonist  shared  their  forces  three  times 
during  the  fight,  which  caused  it  to  be  known  as 
one  of  the  ** Three  Frivolous  Battles  of  Britain", 
the  idea  of  doing  so  being  one  of  **  Britain's  Three 
Criminal  Resolutions ".  Four  alone  survived  the 
fray:  one,  because  he  was  so  ugly  that  all  shrank 
from  him,  believing  him  to  be  a  devil;  another, 
whom  no  one  touched  because  he  was  so  beautiful 
that  they  took  him  for  an  angel;  a  third,  whose 
great  strength  no  one  could  resist;  and  Arthur 
himself,  who,  after  revenging  the  death  of  Gwalch- 
mei  upon  Medrawt,  went  to  the  island  of  Avilion 
to  heal  him  of  his  grievous  wounds. 

And  thence — from  the   Elysium  of  the  Celts — 

^  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XXI,  chap.  i. 

*  The  fullest  list  of  translated  triads  is  contained  in  the  appendix  to  Probert's 
Ancient  Laws  of  Cambria,  1823.  Many  are  also  given  as  an  appendix  in  Skene's 
Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales, 


The  Mythological  ^  *  Coming  of  A  rthur "     335 

popular  belief  has  always  been  that  he  will  some 
day  return.  But  just  as  the  gods  of  the  Gaels  are 
said  to  dwell  sometimes  in  the  ''  Land  of  the 
Living",  beyond  the  western  wave,  and  sometimes 
in  the  palace  of  a  hollow  hill,  so  Arthur  is  some- 
times thought  to  be  in  Avilion,  and  sometimes  to 
be  sitting  with  his  champions  in  a  charmed  sleep 
in  some  secret  place,  waiting  for  the  trumpet  to 
be  blown  that  shall  call  him  forth  to  reconquer 
Britain.  The  legend  is  found  in  the  Eildon  Hills; 
in  the  Snowdon  district;  at  Cadbury,  in  Somerset, 
the  best  authenticated  Camelot;  in  the  Vale  of 
Neath,  in  South  Wales;  as  well  as  in  other  places. 
He  slumbers,  but  he  has  not  died.  The  ancient 
Welsh  poem  called  **The  Verses  of  the  Graves  of 
the  Warriors"^  enumerates  the  last  resting-places 
of  most  of  the  British  gods  and  demi-gods.  *^  The 
grave  of  Gwydion  is  in  the  marsh  of  Dinlleu  ",  the 
grave  of  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes  is  **  under  the  protection 
of  the  sea  with  which  he  was  familiar",  and  ** where 
the  wave  makes  a  sullen  sound  is  the  grave  of 
Dylan";  we  know  the  graves  of  Pryderi,  of  Gwalch- 
mei,  of  March,  of  Mabon,  even  of  the  great  Beli, 

but 

"  Not  wise  the  thought — a  grave  for  Arthur  ".^ 

*  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen  XIX ^  Vol,  I,  pp.  309-318  in  Skene. 

*  This  is  Professor  Rhys' s  translation  of  the  Welsh  line,  no  doubt  more  strictly 
correct  than  the  famous  rendering:  "  Unknown  is  the  grave  of  Arthur". 


CHAPTER   XXII 

THE   TREASURES    OF    BRITAIN 

It  IS  in  keeping  with  the  mythological  character 
of  Arthur  that  the  early  Welsh  tales  recorded  of 
him  are  of  a  different  nature  from  those  which  swell 
the  pseudo-histories  of  Nennius^  and  of  Geoffrey 
of  Monmouth.  We  hear  nothing  of  that  subjuga- 
tion of  the  countries  of  Western  Europe  which  fills 
so  large  a  part  in  the  two  books  of  the  Historia 
Britonum  which  Geoffrey  has  devoted  to  him.^ 
Conqueror  he  is,  but  his  conquests  are  not  in  any 
land  known  to  geographers.  It  is  against  Hades, 
and  not  against  Rome,  that  he  achieves  his  highest 
triumphs.  This  is  the  true  history  of  King  Arthur, 
and  we  may  read  more  fragments  and  snatches  of 
it  in  two  prose-tales  preserved  in  the  Red  Book  of 
Hergest.  Both  these  tales  date,  in  the  actual  form 
in  which  they  have  come  down  to  us,  from  the 
twelfth  century.  But,  in  each  of  them,  the  writer 
seems  to  be  stretching  out  his  hands  to  gather  in 
the  dying  traditions  of  a  very  remote  past. 

When  a  Welsh  man-at-arms  named  Rhonabwy 
lay  down,  one  night,  to  sleep  upon  a  yellow  calf-skin, 
the  only  furniture  in  a  noisome  hut,  in  which  he  had 
taken  shelter,  that  was  comparatively  free  from 
vermin,  he  had  the  vision  which  is  related  in  the  tale 

1  "History  of  the  Britons ",  §  50. 

*  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth.     Books  IX  and  X,  and  chaps,  i  and  11  of  XI. 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  337 

called  **  The  Dream  of  Rhonabwy  ".^  He  thought 
that  he  was  travelling  with  his  companions  towards 
the  Severn,  when  they  heard  a  rushing  noise  behind 
them,  and,  looking  back,  saw  a  gigantic  rider  upon 
a  monstrous  horse.  So  terrible  was  the  horseman's 
appearance  that  they  all  started  to  run  from  him. 
But  their  running  was  of  no  avail,  for  every  time 
the  horse  drew  in  its  breath,  it  sucked  them  back  to 
its  very  chest,  only,  however,  to  fling  them  forward 
as  it  breathed  out  again.  In  despair  they  fell  down 
and  besought  their  pursuer's  mercy.  He  granted 
it,  asked  their  names,  and  told  them,  in  return,  his 
own.  He  was  known  as  Iddawc  the  Agitator  of 
Britain;  for  it  was  he  who,  in  his  love  of  war,  had 
purposely  precipitated  the  Battle  of  Camlan.  Arthur 
had  sent  him  to  reason  with  Medrawt;  but  though 
Arthur  had  charged  him  with  the  fairest  sayings 
he  could  think  of,  Iddawc  translated  them  into  the 
harshest  he  could  devise.  But  he  had  done  seven 
years'  penance,  and  had  been  forgiven,  and  was 
now  riding  to  Arthur's  camp.  Thither  he  insisted 
upon  taking  Rhonabwy  and  his  companions. 

Arthur's  army  was  encamped  for  a  mile  around 
the  ford  of  Rhyd  y  Groes,  upon  both  sides  of  the 
road ;  and  on  a  small  flat  island  in  the  middle  of  the 
river  was  the  Emperor  himself,  in  converse  with 
Bedwini  the  Bishop  and  Gwarthegyd,  the  son  of 
Kaw.  Like  Ossian,  when  he  came  back  to  Ireland 
after  his  three  hundred  years'  sojourn  in  the  **  Land 
of  Promise  ",^  Arthur  marvelled  at  the  puny  size  of 

^  Translated  by  Lady  Guest  in  her  Mahinogion. 
''■  See  chap,  xiv — "Finn  and  the  Fenians ". 
(  B  219  )  Y 


^;^8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  people  whom  Iddawc  had  brought  for  him  to 
look  at.  *'  And  where,  Iddawc,  didst  thou  find 
these  little  men?"  "  I  found  them.  Lord,  up  yonder 
on  the  road."  Then  the  Emperor  smiled.  **  Lord," 
said  Iddawc,  ''wherefore  dost  thou  laugh?"  **  Idd- 
awc," replied  Arthur,  *'  I  laugh  not;  but  it  pitieth 
me  that  men  of  such  stature  as  these  should  have 
this  island  in  their  keeping,  after  the  men  that 
guarded  it  of  yore."  Then  he  turned  away,  and 
Iddawc  told  Rhonabwy  and  his  companions  to  keep 
silent,  and  they  would  see  what  they  would  see. 

The  scope  of  such  a  book  as  this  allows  no  space 
to  describe  the  persons  and  equipments  of  the 
warriors  who  came  riding  down  with  their  com- 
panies to  join  Arthur,  as  he  made  his  great  march 
to  fight  the  Battle  of  Badon,  thought  by  some  to 
be  historical,  and  located  at  Bath.  The  reader  who 
turns  to  the  tale  itself  will  see  what  Rhonabwy  saw. 
Many  of  Arthur's  warriors  he  will  know  by  name: 
Caradawc  the  Strong-armed,  who  is  here  called  a 
son,  not  of  Bran,  but  of  Llyr;  March  son  of  Meir- 
chion,  the  underworld  king;  Kai,  described  as  **the 
fairest  horseman  in  all  Arthur  s  court " ;  Gwalchmei, 
the  son  of  Gwyar  and  of  Arthur  himself;  Mabon, 
the  son  of  Modron;  Trystan  son  of  Tallwch,  the 
lover  of  **  The  Fair  Isoult";  Goreu,  Arthur's  cousin 
and  his  rescuer  from  Manawyddan's  bone-prison; 
these,  and  many  more,  will  pass  before  him,  as  they 
passed  before  Rhonabwy  during  the  three  days  and 
three  nights  that  he  slept  and  dreamed  upon  the 
calf-skin. 

This  story  of  the  **  Dream  of  Rhonabwy",  elaborate 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  339 

as  it  is  in  all  its  details,  is  yet,  in  substance,  little 
more  than  a  catalogue.  The  intention  of  its  un- 
known author  seems  to  have  been  to  draw  a  series 
of  pictures  of  what  he  considered  to  be  the  principal 
among  Arthur's  followers.  The  other  story — that 
of  **Kulhwch  and  Olwen" — also  takes  this  catalogue 
form,  but  the  matters  enumerated  are  of  a  different 
kind.  It  is  not  so  much  a  record  of  men  as  of 
things.  Not  the  heroes  of  Britain,  but  the  treasures 
of  Britain  are  its  subject.  One  might  compare  it 
with  the  Gaelic  story  of  the  adventures  of  the  three 
sons  of  Tuirenn.^ 

The  ** Thirteen  Treasures  of  Britain"  were  famous 
in  early  legend.  They  belonged  to  gods  and  heroes, 
and  were  current  in  our  island  till  the  end  of  the 
divine  age,  when  Merlin,  fading  out  of  the  world, 
took  them  with  him  into  his  airy  tomb,  never  to  be 
seen  by  mortal  eyes  again.  According  to  tradition,^ 
they  consisted  of  a  sword,  a  basket,  a  drinking-horn, 
a  chariot,  a  halter,  a  knife,  a  cauldron,  a  whetstone, 
a  garment,  a  pan,  a  platter,  a  chess-board,  and  a 
mantle,  all  possessed  of  not  less  marvellous  qualities 
than  the  apples,  the  pig-skin,  the  spear,  the  horses 
and  chariot,  the  pigs,  the  hound-whelp,  and  the 
cooking-spit  which  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  obtained 
for  Lugh.^  It  is  these  same  legendary  treasures 
that  reappear,  no  doubt,  in  the  story  of  '*  Kulhwch 
and  Olwen ".  The  number  tallies,  for  there  are 
thirteen  of  them.     Some  are  certainly,  and  others 

1  Chap.  VIII — "  The  GaeUc  Argonauts". 

*  The  list  will  be  found,  translated  from  an  old  Welsh  MS.,  in  the  notes  to 
Kulhwch  and  Olwen,  in^Lady  Guest's  Mabinogion, 
8  Chap.  VIII— "The  Gaelic  Argonauts", 


340         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

probably,  identical  with  those  of  the  other  tradition. 
That  there  should  be  discrepancies  need  cause  no 
surprise,  for  it  is  not  unlikely  that  there  were  several 
different  versions  of  their  legend.  Everyone  had 
heard  of  the  Thirteen  Treasures  of  Britain.  Many, 
no  doubt,  disputed  as  to  what  they  were.  Others 
might  ask  whence  they  came.  The  story  of 
**  Kulhwch  and  Olwen  "  was  composed  to  tell  them. 
They  were  won  by  Arthur  and  his  mighty  men. 

Kulhwch^  is  the  hero  of  the  story  and  Olwen  is 
its  heroine,  but  only,  as  it  were,  by  courtesy.  The 
pair  provide  a  love-interest  which,  as  in  the  tales  of 
all  primitive  people,  is  kept  in  the  background.  The 
woman,  in  such  romances,  takes  the  place  of  the 
gold  and  gems  in  a  modern  ** treasure-hunt "  story; 
she  is  won  by  overcoming  external  obstacles,  and 
not  by  any  difficulty  in  obtaining  her  own  consent. 
In  this  romance^,  Kulhwch  was  the  son  of  a  king 
who  afterwards  married  a  widow  with  a  grown-up 
daughter,  whom  his  stepmother  urged  Kulhwch  to 
marry.  On  his  modestly  replying  that  he  was  not 
yet  of  an  age  to  wed,  she  laid  the  destiny  on  him 
that  he  should  never  have  a  wife  at  all,  unless  he 
could  win  Olwen,  the  daughter  of  a  terrible  father 
called  *'  Hawthorn,  Chief  of  Giants".^ 

The  '*  Chief  of  Giants  "  was  as  hostile  to  suitors 
as  he  was  monstrous  in  shape;  and  no  wonder!  for 
he  knew  that  on  his  daughter's  marriage  his  own 
life  would  come  to  an  end.     Both  in  this  peculiarity 


1  Pronounced  Keelhookh. 

"  The  following  pages  sketch  out  the  main  incidents  of  the  story  as  translated 
by  Lady  Guest  in  her  Mabinogion.  *  In  Welsh,  Yspaddaden  Penkawr. 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  341 

and  in  the  description  of  his  ponderous  eyebrows, 
which  fell  so  heavily  over  his  eyes  that  he  could  not 
see  until  they  had  been  lifted  up  with  forks,  he  re- 
minds one  of  the  Fomor,  Balor.  Of  his  daughter, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  Welsh  tale  gives  a  descrip- 
tion as  beautiful  as  01  wen  was,  herself.  **  More 
yellow  was  her  head  than  the  flower  of  the  broom, 
and  her  skin  was  whiter  than  the  foam  of  the  wave, 
and  fairer  were  her  hands  and  her  fingers  than  the 
blossoms  of  the  wood  anemone  amidst  the  spray 
of  the  meadow-fountain.  The  eye  of  the  trained 
hawk,  the  glance  of  the  three  -  mewed  falcon  was 
not  brighter  than  hers.  Her  bosom  was  more 
snowy  than  the  breast  of  the  white  swan,  her 
cheek  was  redder  than  the  reddest  roses.  Whoso 
beheld  her  was  filled  with  her  love.  Four  white 
trefoils  sprung  up  wherever  she  trod.  And  there- 
fore was  she  called  Olwen."^ 

Kulhwch  had  no  need  to  see  her  to  fall  in  love 
with  her.  He  blushed  at  her  very  name,  and  asked 
his  father  how  he  could  obtain  her  in  marriage. 
His  father  reminded  him  that  he  was  Arthur's 
cousin,  and  advised  him  to  claim  Olwen  from  him 
as  a  boon. 

So  Kulhwch  *' pricked  forth  upon  a  steed  with 
head  dappled  grey,  of  four  winters  old,  firm  of  limb, 
with  shell-formed  hoofs,  having  a  bridle  of  linked 
gold  on  his  head,  and  upon  him  a  saddle  of  costly 
gold.  And  in  the  youth's  hand  were  two  spears 
of  silver,  sharp,  well  -  tempered,  headed  with  steel, 

^  I.e.  She  of  the  White  Track.    The  beauty  of  Olwen  was  proverbial  in  mediaeval 
Welsh  poetry. 


342         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

three  ells  in  length,  of  an  edge  to  wound  the  wind, 
and  cause  blood  to  flow,  and  swifter  than  the  fall  of 
the  dewdrop  from  the  blade  of  reed-grass  upon  the 
earth  when  the  dew  of  June  is  at  the  heaviest.  A 
gold-hilted  sword  was  upon  his  thigh,  the  blade  of 
which  was  of  gold,  bearing  a  cross  of  inlaid  gold  of 
the  hue  of  the  lightning  of  heaven;  his  war-horn 
was  of  ivory.  Before  him  were  two  brindled  white- 
breasted  greyhounds,  having  strong  collars  of  rubies 
about  their  necks,  reaching  from  the  shoulder  to  the 
ear.  And  the  one  that  was  on  the  left  side  bounded 
across  to  the  right  side,  and  the  one  on  the  right  to 
the  left,  and  like  two  sea-swallows  sported  around 
him.  And  his  courser  cast  up  four  sods  with  his 
four  hoofs,  like  four  swallows  in  the  air,  about  his 
head,  now  above,  now  below.  About  him  was  a 
four-cornered  cloth  of  purple,  and  an  apple  of  gold 
was  at  each  corner,  and  every  one  of  the  apples  was 
of  the  value  of  an  hundred  kine.  And  there  was 
precious  gold  of  the  value  of  three  hundred  kine 
upon  his  shoes,  and  upon  his  stirrups,  from  his  knee 
to  the  tip  of  his  toe.  And  the  blade  of  grass  bent 
not  beneath  him,  so  light  was  his  courser's  tread  as 
he  journeyed  towards  the  gate  of  Arthur's  palace." 

Nor  did  this  bold  suitor  stand  greatly  upon  cere- 
mony. He  arrived  after  the  portal  of  the  palace 
had  been  closed  for  the  night,  and,  contrary  to  all 
precedent,  sent  to  Arthur  demanding  instant  entry. 
Although,  too,  it  was  the  custom  for  visitors  to  dis- 
mount at  the  horse-block  at  the  gate,  he  did  not  do 
so,  but  rode  his  charger  into  the  hall.  After  greet- 
ings had  passed  between  him  and  Arthur,  and  he 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  343 

had  announced  his  name,  he  demanded  Olwen  for 
his  bride  at  the  hands  of  the  Emperor  and  his 
warriors. 

Neither  Arthur  nor  any  of  his  court  had  ever 
heard  of  Olwen.  However,  he  promised  his  cousin 
either  to  find  her  for  him,  or  to  prove  that  there 
was  no  such  person.  He  ordered  his  most  skilful 
warriors  to  accompany  Kulhwch;  Kai,  with  his 
companion  Bedwyr,  the  swiftest  of  men ;  Kynddelig, 
who  was  as  good  a  guide  in  a  strange  country  as 
in  his  own ;  Gwrhyr,  who  knew  all  the  languages  of 
men,  as  well  as  of  all  other  creatures;  Gwalchmei, 
who  never  left  an  adventure  unachieved;  and  Menw, 
who  could  render  himself  and  his  companions  in- 
visible at  will. 

They  travelled  until  they  came  to  a  castle  on  an 
open  plain.  Feeding  on  the  plain  was  a  countless 
herd  of  sheep,  and,  on  a  mound  close  by,  a  monstrous 
shepherd  with  a  monstrous  dog.  Menw  cast  a  spell 
over  the  dog,  and  they  approached  the  shepherd. 
He  was  called  Custennin,  a  brother  of  Hawthorn, 
while  his  wife  was  a  sister  of  Kulhwch  s  own  mother. 
The  evil  chief  of  giants  had  reduced  his  brother  to 
servitude,  and  murdered  all  his  twenty -four  sons 
save  one,  who  was  kept  hidden  in  a  stone  chest. 
Therefore  he  welcomed  Kulhwch  and  the  embassy 
from  Arthur,  and  promised  to  help  them  secretly, 
the  more  readily  since  Kai  offered  to  take  the  one 
surviving  son  under  his  protection.  Custennin's  wife 
procured  Kulhwch  a  secret  meeting  with  Olwen, 
and  the  damsel  did  not  altogether  discourage  her 
wooer's  suit. 


344         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

The  party  started  for  Hawthorn's  castle.  With- 
out raising  any  alarm,  they  slew  the  nine  porters 
and  the  nine  watch-dogs,  and  came  unhindered  into 
the  hall.  They  greeted  the  ponderous  giant,  and 
announced  the  reason  of  their  coming.  **  Where 
are  my  pages  and  my  servants?"  he  said.  "  Raise 
up  the  forks  beneath  my  two  eyebrows  which  have 
fallen  over  my  eyes,  so  that  I  may  see  the  fashion 
of  my  son-in-law."  He  glared  at  them,  and  told 
them  to  come  again  upon  the  next  day. 

They  turned  to  go,  and,  as  they  did  so,  Hawthorn 
seized  a  poisoned  dart,  and  threw  it  after  them. 
But  Bedwyr  caught  it,  and  cast  it  back,  wounding 
the  giant's  knee.  They  left  him  grumbling,  slept 
at  the  house  of  Custennin,  and  returned,  the  next 
morninor. 

Again  they  demanded  Olwen  from  her  father, 
threatening  him  with  death  if  he  refused.  ''Her 
four  great-grandmothers,  and  her  four  great-grand- 
sires  are  yet  alive,"  replied  Hawthorn;  "  it  is  needful 
that  I  take  counsel  of  them."  So  they  turned  away, 
and,  as  they  went,  he  flung  a  second  dart,  which 
Menw  caught,  and  hurled  back,  piercing  the  giant's 
body. 

The  next  time  they  came.  Hawthorn  warned  them 
not  to  shoot  at  him  again,  unless  they  desired  death. 
Then  he  ordered  his  eyebrows  to  be  lifted  up,  and, 
as  soon  as  he  could  see,  he  flung  a  poisoned  dart 
straight  at  Kulhwch.  But  the  suitor  himself  caught 
it,  and  flung  it  back,  so  that  it  pierced  Hawthorn's 
eyeball  and  came  out  through  the  back  of  his  head. 
Here  again  we  are  reminded  of  the  myth  of  Lugh 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  345 

and  Balor.  Hawthorn,  however,  was  not  killed, 
though  he  was  very  much  discomforted.  '*  A  cursed 
ungentle  son-in-law,  truly!"  he  complained.  *'As 
long  as  I  remain  alive,  my  eyesight  will  be  the 
worse.  Whenever  I  go  against  the  wind,  my  eyes 
will  water;  and  peradventure  my  head  will  burn, 
and  I  shall  have  a  giddiness  every  new  moon. 
Cursed  be  the  fire  in  which  it  was  forged!  Like 
the  bite  of  a  mad  dog  is  the  stroke  of  this  poisoned 


iron." 


It  was  now  the  turn  of  Kulhwch  and  his  party  to 
warn  the  giant  that  there  must  be  no  more  dart- 
throwing.  He  appeared,  indeed,  more  amenable  to 
reason,  and  allowed  himself  to  be  placed  opposite 
to  Kulhwch,  in  a  chair,  to  discuss  the  amount  of  his 
daughter's  bride-price. 

Its  terms,  as  he  gradually  unfolded  them,  were 
terrific.  The  blood-fine  paid  for  Cian  to  Lugh 
seems,  indeed,  a  trifle  beside  it.  To  obtain  grain, 
for  food  and  liquor  at  his  daughter's  wedding,  a 
vast  hill  which  he  showed  to  Kulhwch  must  be 
rooted  up,  levelled,  ploughed,  sown,  and  harvested 
in  one  day.  No  one  could  do  this  except  Amaethon 
son  of  Don,  the  divine  husbandman,  and  Govannan 
son  of  Don,  the  divine  smith,  and  they  must  have  the 
service  of  three  pairs  of  magic  oxen.  He  must  also 
have  returned  to  him  the  same  nine  bushels  of  flax 
which  he  had  sown  in  his  youth,  and  which  had 
never  come  up;  for  only  out  of  this  very  flax  should 
be  made  the  white  wimple  for  Olwen  s  head.  For 
mead,  too,  he  must  have  honey  **nine  times  sweeter 
than  the  honey  of  the  virgin  swarm". 


34^         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Then  followed  the  enumeration  of  the  thirteen 
treasures  to  be  paid  to  him  as  dowry.  Such  a  list 
of  wedding  presents  was  surely  never  known!  No 
pot  could  hold  such  honey  as  he  demanded  but  the 
magic  vessel  of  Llwyr,  the  son  of  Llwyryon.  There 
would  not  be  enough  food  for  all  the  wedding-guests, 
unless  he  had  the  basket  of  Gwyddneu  Garanhir, 
from  which  all  the  men  in  the  world  could  be  fed, 
thrice  nine  at  a  time.  No  cauldron  could  cook  the 
meat,  except  that  of  Diwrnach  the  Gael.  The  mystic 
drinking-horn  of  Gwlgawd  Gododin  must  be  there, 
to  give  them  drink.  The  harp  of  Teirtu,  which,  like 
the  Dagda's,  played  of  itself,  must  make  music  for 
them.  The  giant  father-in-law's  hair  could  only  be 
shorn  with  one  instrument — the  tusk  of  White-tooth, 
King  of  the  Boars,  and  not  even  by  that  unless  it 
was  plucked  alive  out  of  its  owner  s  mouth.  Also, 
before  the  hair  could  be  cut,  it  must  be  spread  out, 
and  this  could  not  be  done  until  it  had  been  first 
softened  with  the  blood  of  the  perfectly  black  sor- 
ceress, daughter  of  the  perfectly  white  sorceress,  from 
the  Source  of  the  Stream  of  Sorrow,  on  the  borders 
of  hell.  Nor  could  the  sorceress's  blood  be  kept 
warm  enough  unless  it  was  placed  in  the  bottles  of 
Gwyddolwyn  Gorr,  which  preserved  the  heat  of  any 
liquor  put  into  them,  though  it  was  carried  from  the 
east  of  the  world  to  the  west.  Another  set  of  bottles 
he  must  also  have  to  keep  milk  for  his  guests  in — 
those  bottles  of  Rhinnon  Rhin  Barnawd  in  which  no 
drink  ever  turned  sour.  For  himself,  he  required 
the  sword  of  Gwrnach  the  Giant,  which  that  per- 
sonage would  never  allow  out  of  his  own  keeping, 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  347 

because  it  was  destined  that  he  himself  should  fall 
by  it.  Last  of  all,  he  must  be  given  the  comb,  the 
razor,  and  the  scissors  which  lay  between  the  ears 
of  Twrch  Trwyth,  a  king  changed  into  the  most 
terrible  of  wild  boars. 

It  is  the  chase  of  this  boar  which  gives  the  story 
of  *'Kulhwch  and  Olwen"  its  alternative  title — **The 
Twrch  Trwyth".  The  task  was  one  worthy  of  gods 
and  demi-gods.  Its  contemplation  might  well  have 
appalled  Kulhwch,  who,  however,  was  not  so  easily 
frightened.  To  every  fresh  demand,  every  new 
obstacle  put  in  his  way,  he  gave  the  same  answer: 

**  It  will  be  easy  for  me  to  compass  this,  although 
thou  mayest  think  that  it  will  not  be  easy  ". 

Whether  it  was  easy  or  not  will  be  seen  from  the 
conditions  under  which  alone  the  hunt  could  be 
brought  to  a  successful  end.  No  ordinary  hounds 
or  huntsmen  would  avail.  The  chief  of  the  pack 
must  be  Drudwyn,  the  whelp  of  Greid  the  son  of 
Eri,  led  in  the  one  leash  that  would  hold  him, 
fastened,  by  the  one  chain  strong  enough,  to  the 
one  collar  that  would  contain  his  neck.  No  hunts- 
man could  hunt  with  this  dog  except  Mabon  son 
of  Modron;  and  he  had,  ages  before,  been  taken 
from  between  his  mother  and  the  wall  when  he  was 
three  nights  old,  and  it  was  not  known  where  he 
was,  or  even  whether  he  were  living  or  dead.  There 
was  only  one  steed  that  could  carry  Mabon,  namely 
Gwynn  Mygdwn,  the  horse  of  Gweddw.  Two  other 
marvellous  hounds,  the  cubs  of  Gast  Rhymhi,  must 
also  be  obtained;  they  must  be  held  in  the  only 
leash  they  would  not  break,  for  it  would  be  made 


34^         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

out  of  the  beard  of  the  giant  Dissull,  plucked  from 
him  while  he  was  still  alive.  Even  with  this,  no 
huntsman  could  lead  them  except  Kynedyr  Wyllt, 
who  was  himself  nine  times  more  wild  than  the 
wildest  beast  upon  the  mountains.  All  Arthur's 
mighty  men  must  come  to  help,  even  Gwyn  son  of 
Nudd,  upon  his  black  horse;  and  how  could  he  be 
spared  from  his  terrible  duty  of  restraining  the 
devils  in  hell  from  breaking  loose  and  destroying 
the  world? 

Here  is  material  for  romance  indeed!  But,  un- 
happily, we  shall  never  know  the  full  story  of  how 
all  these  magic  treasures  were  obtained,  all  these 
magic  hounds  captured  and  compelled  to  hunt,  all 
these  magic  huntsmen  brought  to  help.  The  story — 
which  Mr.  Nutt^  considers  to  be,  '*  saving  the  finest 
tales  of  the  'Arabian  Nights',  the  greatest  romantic 
fairy  tale  the  world  has  ever  known" — is  not,  as  we 
have  it  now,  complete.  It  reads  fully  enough;  but, 
on  casting  backwards  and  forwards,  between  the  list 
of  feats  to  be  performed  and  the  body  of  the  tale 
which  is  supposed  to  relate  them  all,  we  find  many 
of  them  wanting.  **  The  host  of  Arthur",  we  are 
told,  **  dispersed  themselves  into  parties  of  one  and 
two",  each  party  intent  upon  some  separate  quest. 
The  adventures  of  some  of  them  have  come  down, 
but  those  of  others  have  not.  We  are  told  how 
Kai  slew  Gwrnach  the  Giant  with  his  own  sword; 
how  Gwyrthur  son  of  Greidawl,  Gwyn's  rival  for 
the  love  of  Creudylad,  saved  an  anthill  from  fire, 
and  how  the  grateful  ants  searched  for  and  found 

*  In  his  notes  to  his  edition  of  Lady  Guest's  Mabinogion.     Published  1902. 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  349 

the  very  flax-seeds  sown  by  Hawthorn  in  his  youth; 
how  Arthur's  host  surrounded  and  took  Gast 
Rhymhi  s  cubs,  and  how  Kai  and  Bedwyr  overcame 
Dissull,  and  plucked  out  his  beard  with  wooden 
tweezers,  to  make  a  leash  for  them.  We  learn  how 
Arthur  went  to  Ireland,  and  brought  back  the  caul- 
dron of  Diwrnach  the  Gael,  full  of  Irish  money;  how 
White-tusk  the  Boar-king  was  chased  and  killed; 
and  how  Arthur  condescended  to  slay  the  perfectly 
black  sorceress  with  his  own  hand.  That  others  of 
the  treasures  were  acquired  is  hinted  rather  than 
said.  Most  important  of  all  (for  so  much  depended 
on  him),  we  find  out  where  the  stolen  Mabon  was, 
and  learn  how  he  was  rescued. 

So  many  ages  had  elapsed  since  Mabon  had  dis- 
appeared that  there  seemed  little  hope  of  ever  find- 
ing news  of  him.  Nevertheless  Gwrhyr,  who  spoke 
the  languages  of  all  creatures,  went  to  enquire  of  that 
ancient  bird,  the  Ousel  of  Cilgwri.  But  the  Ousel, 
though  in  her  time  she  had  pecked  a  smith's  anvil 
down  to  the  size  of  a  nut,  was  yet  too  young  to  have 
heard  of  Mabon.  She  sent  Gwrhyr  to  a  creature 
formed  before  her,  the  Stag  of  Redynvre.  But 
though  the  Stag  had  lived  to  see  an  oak-sapling 
slowly  grow  to  be  a  tree  with  a  thousand  branches, 
and  as  slowly  decay  again  till  it  was  a  withered 
stump,  he  had  never  heard  of  Mabon. 

Therefore  he  sent  him  on  to  a  creature  still  older 
than  himself — the  Owl  of  Cwm  Cawlwyd.  The 
wood  she  lived  in  had  been  thrice  rooted  up,  and 
had  thrice  re-sown  itself,  and  yet,  in  all  that  immense 
time,  she  had  never  heard  of  Mabon.     There  was 


350         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

but  one  who  might  have,  she  told  Gwrhyr,  and  he 
was  the  Eagle  of  Gwern  Abwy. 

Here,  at  last,  they  struck  Mabon's  trail.  **  The 
Eagle  said:  *  I  have  been  here  for  a  great  space  of 
time,  and  when  I  first  came  hither  there  was  a  rock 
here,  from  the  top  of  which  I  pecked  at  the  stars 
every  evening;  and  now  it  is  not  so  much  as  a  span 
high.  From  that  day  to  this  I  have  been  here,  and 
I  have  never  heard  of  the  man  for  whom  you  inquire, 
except  once  when  I  went  in  search  of  food  as  far  as 
Llyn  Llyw.  And  when  I  came  there,  I  struck  my 
talons  into  a  salmon,  thinking  he  would  serve  me  as 
food  for  a  long  time.  But  he  drew  me  into  the 
deep,  and  I  was  scarcely  able  to  escape  from  him. 
After  that  I  went  with  my  whole  kindred  to  attack 
him,  and  to  try  to  destroy  him,  but  he  sent  messen- 
gers, and  made  peace  with  me;  and  came  and  be- 
sought me  to  take  fifty  fish  spears  out  of  his  back. 
Unless  he  know  something  of  him  whom  you  seek, 
I  cannot  tell  who  may.  However,  I  will  guide  you 
to  the  place  where  he  is.'" 

It  happened  that  the  Salmon  did  know.  With 
every  tide  he  went  up  the  Severn  as  far  as  the  walls 
of  Gloucester,  and  there,  he  said,  he  had  found  such 
wrong  as  he  had  never  found  anywhere  else.  So  he 
took  Kai  and  Gwrhyr  upon  his  shoulders  and  carried 
them  to  the  wall  of  the  prison  where  a  captive  was 
heard  lamenting.  This  was  Mabon  son  of  Modron, 
who  was  suffering  such  imprisonment  as  not  even 
Lludd  of  the  Silver  Hand  or  Greid,  the  son  of  Eri/ 

^  So  says  the  text.     But  a  triad  quoted  by  Lady  Guest  in  her  notes  gives  the 
'•  Three  Paramount  Prisoners  of  Britain  "  differently.  ' '  The  three  supreme  prisoner* 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  351 

the  other  two  of  the  ''Three  Paramount  Prisoners 
of  Britain",  had  endured  before  him.  But  it  came  to 
an  end  now;  for  Kai  sent  to  Arthur,  and  he  and  his 
warriors  stormed  Gloucester,  and  brought  Mabon 
away. 

All  was  at  last  ready  for  the  final  achievement — 
the  hunting  of  Twrch  Trwyth,  who  was  now,  with 
his  seven  young  pigs,  in  Ireland.  Before  he  was 
roused,  it  was  thought  wise  to  send  the  wizard 
Menw  to  find  out  by  ocular  inspection  whether  the 
comb,  the  scissors,  and  the  razor  were  still  between 
his  ears.  Menw  took  the  form  of  a  bird,  and  settled 
upon  the  Boar's  head.  He  saw  the  coveted  trea- 
sures, and  tried  to  take  one  of  them,  but  Twrch 
Trwyth  shook  himself  so  violently  that  some  of  the 
venom  from  his  bristles  spurted  over  Menw,  who 
was  never  quite  well  again  from  that  day. 

Then  the  hunt  was  up,  the  men  surrounded  him, 
and  the  dogs  were  loosed  at  him  from  every  side. 
On  the  first  day,  the  Irish  attacked  him.  On  the 
second  day,  Arthur  s  household  encountered  him  and 
were  worsted.  Then  Arthur  himself  fought  with 
him  for  nine  days  and  nine  nights  without  even 
killing  one  of  the  little  pigs. 

A  truce  was  now  called,  so  that  Gwrhyr,  who 
spoke  all  languages,  might  go  and  parley  with  him. 
Gwrhyr  begged  him  to  give  up  in  peace  the  comb, 
the   scissors,   and   the    razor,   which    were   all    that 

of  the  Island  of  Britain,  Llyr  Llediath  in  the  prison  of  Euroswydd  Wledig,  and 
Madoc,  or  Mabon,  and  Gweir,  son  of  Gweiryoth ;  and  one  more  exalted  than  the 
three,  and  that  was  Arthur,  who  was  for  three  nights  in  the  Castle  of  Oeth  and 
Anoeth,  and  three  nights  in  the  prison  of  Wen  Pendragon,  and  three  nights  in  the 
dark  prison  under  the  stone.  And  one  youth  released  him  from  these  three  prisons ; 
that  youth  was  Goreu  the  son  of  Custennin,  his  cousin." 


352         Mythology  of  the  British  Islartds 

Arthur  wanted.  But  the  Boar  Trwyth,  indignant 
of  having  been  so  annoyed,  would  not.  On  the 
contrary,  he  promised  to  go  on  the  morrow  into 
Arthurs  country,  and  do  all  the  harm  he  could 
there. 

So  Twrch  Trwyth  with  his  seven  pigs  crossed 
the  sea  into  Wales,  and  Arthur  followed  with  his 
warriors  in  the  ship  **  Prydwen  ".  Here  the  story 
becomes  wonderfully  realistic  and  circumstantial. 
We  are  told  of  every  place  they  passed  through  on 
the  long  chase  through  South  Wales,  and  can  trace 
the  course  of  the  hunt  over  the  map.^  We  know  of 
every  check  the  huntsmen  had,  and  what  happened 
every  time  the  boars  turned  to  bay.  The  "casualty- 
list"  of  Arthurs  men  is  completely  given;  and  we 
can  also  follow  the  shrinking  of  Twrch  Trwyth  s 
herd,  as  his  little  pigs  fell  one  by  one.  None  were 
left  but  Trwyth  himself  by  the  time  the  Severn 
estuary  was  reached,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wye. 

Here  the  hunt  came  up  with  him,  and  drove  him 
into  the  water,  and  in  this  unfamiliar  element  he 
was  outmatched.  Osla  Big- Knifed  Manawyddan 
son  of  Llyr,  Kacmwri,  the  servant  of  Arthur,  and 
Gwyngelli  caught  him  by  his  four  feet  and  plunged 
his  head  under  water,  while  the  two  chief  huntsmen, 
Mabon  son  of  Modron,  and  Kyledyr  Willt,  came, 
one  on  each  side  of  him,  and  took  the  scissors  and 
the  razor.     Before  they  could  get  the  comb,  how- 

1  See  Rhys:  Celtic  Folklore,  chap,  x — "  Place-name  Stories  ". 

a  The  "big  knife"  was,  we  are  told  in  the  story,  "a  short  broad  dagger. 
When  Arthur  and  his  hosts  came  before  a  torrent,  they  would  seek  for  a  narrow 
place  where  they  might  pass  the  water,  and  would  lay  the  sheathed  dagger  across 
the  torrent,  and  it  would  form  a  bridge  sufficient  for  the  armies  of  the  three  islands 
of  Britain,  and  of  the  three  islands  adjacent,  with  their  spoil." 


THE    TREASURES    OF    BRITAIN 
From  the  Draiving  by  E.  JVallcousim 


The  Treasures  of  Britain  353 

ever,  he  shook  himself  free,  and  struck  out  for 
Cornwall,  leaving  Osla  and  Kacmwri  half-drowned 
in  the  Severn. 

And  all  this  trouble,  we  are  told,  was  mere  play 
compared  with  the  trouble  they  had  with  him  in 
Cornwall  before  they  could  get  the  comb.  But,  at 
last,  they  secured  it,  and  drove  the  boar  out  over 
the  deep  sea.  He  passed  out  of  sight,  with  two 
of  the  magic  hounds  in  pursuit  of  him,  and  none 
of  them  have  ever  been  heard  of  since. 

The  sight  of  these  treasures,  paraded  before 
Hawthorn,  chief  of  giants,  was,  of  course,  his  death- 
warrant.  All  who  wished  him  ill  came  to  gloat 
over  his  downfall.  But  they  should  have  been  put 
to  shame  by  the  giant,  whose  end  had,  at  least,  a 
certain  dignity.  **My  daughter",  he  said  to  Kulhwch, 
"is  yours,  but  you  need  not  thank  me  for  it,  but 
Arthur,  who  has  accomplished  all  this.  By  my  free 
will  you  should  never  have  had  her,  for  with  her  I 
lose  my  life." 

Thereupon  they  cut  off  his  head,  and  put  it  upon 
a  pole ;  and  that  night  the  undutiful  Olwen  became 
Kulhwch 's  bride. 


(B21») 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

THE  GODS    AS    KING   ARTHUR's    KNIGHTS 

It  is  not,  however,  by  such  fragments  of  legend 

that  Arthur  is  best  known  to  EngHsh  readers.     Not 

Arthur  the  god,  but  Arthur  the  "blameless  king", 

who  founded  the  Table  Round,  from  which  he  sent 

forth  his  knights  "  to  ride  abroad  redressing  human 

wrongs  'V  is  the  figure  which  the  name  conjures  up. 

Nor  is  it  even  from   Sir  Thomas   Malory's  Morte 

Darthur  that  this  conception  comes  to  most  of  us,  but 

from  Tennyson's  Idylls  of  the  King.     But  Tennyson 

has  so  modernized  the  ancient  tradition  that  it  retains 

little  of  the  old  Arthur  but  the  name.     He  tells  us 

himself  that  his  poem  had  but  very  slight  relation 

to — 

..."  that  gray  king,  whose  name,  a  ghost, 
Streams  like  a  cloud,  man-shaped,  from  mountain-peak, 
And  cleaves  to  cairn  and  cromlech  still ;  or  him 
Of  Geoffrey's  book,  or  him  of  Malleor's  .  .  .  "  ;^ 

but  that  he  merely  used  the  legend  to  give  a  sub- 
stantial form  to  his  ideal  figure  of  the  perfect 
English  gentleman — a  title  to  which  the  original 
Arthur  could  scarcely  have  laid  claim.  Still  less 
does  there  remain  in  it  the  least  trace  of  anything 
that  could  suggest  mythology. 

As   much   as   this,    however,    might   be   said   of 

*  Tennyson's  Idvlh  of  the  King;  Guinevere.  ^  Ibid.  To  the  Queen. 

364 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      355 

Malory's  book.  We  may  be  fairly  certain  that  the 
good  Sir  Thomas  had  no  idea  that  the  personages 
of  whom  he  wrote  had  ever  been  anything  different 
from  the  Christian  knights  which  they  had  become 
in  the  late  French  romances  from  which  he  compiled 
his  own  fifteenth-century  work.  The  old  gods  had 
been,  from  time  to  time,  very  completely  euhemer- 
ized.  The  characters  of  the  "  Four  Branches  of  the 
Mabinogi "  are  still  recognizable  as  divine  beings. 
In  the  later  Welsh  stories,  however,  their  divinity 
merely  hangs  about  them  in  shreds  and  tatters,  and 
the  first  Norman  adapters  of  these  stories  made 
them  still  more  definitely  human.  By  the  time 
Malory  came  to  build  up  his  Morte  Darthur  from 
the  foreign  romances,  they  had  altered  so  much  that 
the  shapes  and  deeds  of  gods  could  only  be  recog- 
nized under  their  mediaeval  knightly  disguises  by 
those  who  had  known  them  in  their  ancient  forms. 
We  have  chosen  Malory's  Morte  Darthur,  as 
almost  the  sole  representative  of  Arthurian  literature 
later  than  the  Welsh  poems  and  prose  stories,  for 
three  reasons.  Firstly,  because  it  is  the  English 
Arthurian  xomasiz^  par  excellence  from  which  all  later 
English  authors,  including  Tennyson,  have  drawn 
their  material.  Secondly,  because  the  mass  of  foreign 
literature  dealing  with  the  subject  of  Arthur  is  in 
itself  a  life-study,  and  could  not  by  any  possibility 
be  compressed  within  the  limits  of  a  chapter. 
Thirdly,  because  Malory's  fine  judgment  caused 
him  to  choose  the  best  and  most  typical  foreign 
tales  to  weave  into  his  own  romance;  and  hence 
it  is  that  we  find  most  of  our  old  British  gods — both 


35^         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

those  of  the  earlier  cycle  and  those  of  the  system 
connected  with  Arthur — striding  disguised  through 
his  pages. 

Curiously  enough,  Sir  Edward  Strachey,  in  his 
preface  to  the  **  Globe  "  edition  of  Caxton  s  Morte 
Darthur,  uses  almost  the  same  image  to  describe 
Malory's  prose-poem  that  Matthew  Arnold  handled 
with  such  effect,  in  his  Study  of  Celtic  Literature^ 
to  point  out  the  real  nature  of  the  Mabinogion. 
**  Malory ",  he  says,  ''  has  built  a  great,  rambling, 
mediaeval  castle,  the  walls  of  which  enclose  rude 
and  even  ruinous  work  of  earlier  times."  How 
rude  and  how  ruinous  these  relics  were  Malory 
doubtless  had  not  the  least  idea,  for  he  has  com- 
pletely jumbled  the  ancient  mythology.  Not  only 
do  gods  of  the  older  and  newer  order  appear  to- 
gether, but  the  same  deities,  under  very  often  only 
slightly  varying  names,  come  up  again  and  again 
as  totally  different  characters. 

Take,  for  example,  the  ancient  deity  of  death  and 
Hades.  As  King  Brandegore,  or  Brandegoris  (Bran 
of  Gower),  he  brings  five  thousand  mounted  men  to 
oppose  King  Arthur;^  but,  as  Sir  Brandel,  or  Bran- 
diles  (Bran  of  Gwales^),  he  is  a  valiant  Knight  of 
the  Round  Table,  who  dies  fighting  in  Arthur's 
service.^  Again,  under  his  name  of  Uther  Pen- 
dragon  (Uther  Ben),  he  is  Arthur's  father;*  though 
as  King  Ban  of  Benwyk  (the  "•  Square  Enclosure  ", 
doubtless  the  same  as  Taliesin's  Caer  Pedryvan  and 


1  Morte  Darthur,  Book  I,  chap.  X. 

*  Gresholm  Island,  the  scene  of  "The  Entertaining  of  the  Noble  Head". 

3  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XX,  chap.  viii.  *  Ibid.,  Book  I,  chap.  III. 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      357 

Malory's  Carbonek),  he  is  a  foreign  monarch,  who  is 
Arthur's  ally.^  Yet  again,  as  the  father  of  Guinevere, 
Ogyrvran  has  become  Leodegrance.^  As  King 
Uriens.  or  Urience,  of  Gore  (Gower),  he  marries  one 
of  Arthur's  sisters,^  fights  against  him,  but  finally 
tenders  his  submission,  and  is  enrolled  among  his 
knights.*  Urien  may  also  be  identified  in  the  Morte 
Darthur  as  King  Rience,  or  Ryons,  of  North  Wales,^ 
and  as  King  Nentres  of  Garloth;^  while,  to  crown 
the  varied  disguises  of  this  Proteus  of  British  gods, 
he  appears  in  an  isolated  episode  as  Balan,  who  fights 
with  his  brother  Balin  until  they  kill  one  another. "^ 

One  may  generally  tell  the  divinities  of  the  under- 
world in  these  romances  by  their  connection,  not 
with  the  settled  and  civilized  parts  of  England,  but 
with  the  wild  and  remote  north  and  west,  and  the 
still  wilder  and  remoter  islands.  Just  as  Bran  and 
Urien  are  kings  of  Gower,  so  Arawn,  under  the 
corruptions  of  his  name  into  '*  Anguish  "  and  *'  An- 
guissance ",  is  made  King  of  Scotland  or  Ireland, 
both  countries  having  been  probably  confounded, 
as  the  same  land  of  the  Scotti,  or  Gaels.^  Pwyll, 
Head  of  Annwn,  we  likewise  discover  under  two 
disguises.  As  Pelles,  *'  King  of  the  Foreign  Coun- 
try"^ and  Keeper  of  the  Holy  Grail,  he  is  a  person- 
age of  great  mythological  significance,  albeit  the 
real  nature  of  him  and  his  surroundings  has  been 
overlaid  with  a  Christian  veneer  as  foreign  to  the 

1  Morte  Darthur,  Book  I,  chap.  vill.  *  Ibid. ,  Book  I,  chap.  xvi. 

3  Ihd.,  Book  I,  chap.  ii.  *  /did.,  Book  IV,  chap.  iv. 

*  /did.,  Book  I,  chap.  xxiv.  «  /iid.,  Book  I,  chap.  ii. 
7  /6id.,  Book  n,  chap,  xviii. 

*  /iid.,  Book  V,  chap,  ii;  Book  VHI,  chap,  iv;  Book  XIX,  chap.  XI. 

*  /iid..  Book  XI,  chap.  ii. 


358         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

original  of  Pelles  as  his  own  kingdom  was  to 
Arthur's  knights.  The  Chief  of  Hades  figures  as 
a  *' cousin  nigh  unto  Joseph  of  Arimathie"/  who, 
**  while  he  might  ride  supported  much  Christendom, 
and  holy  church ".^  He  is  represented  as  the  father 
of  Elayne  (Elen^),  whom  he  gives  in  marriage  to 
Sir  Launcelot,  bestowing  upon  the  couple  a  residence 
called  **  Castle  Bliant  ",*  the  name  of  which,  there  is 
good  evidence  to  show,  is  connected  with  that  of 
Pwyll's  vassal  called  Teirnyon  Twryf  Vliant  in  the 
first  of  the  Mabinogi.^  Under  his  other  name  of 
"Sir  Pelleas'' — the  hero  of  Tennyson's  Idyll  of 
Pelleas  and  Ettarre — the  primitive  myth  of  Pwyll 
is  touched  at  a  different  point.  After  his  un- 
fortunate love-passage  with  Ettarre  (or  Ettard,  as 
Malory  calls  her),  Pelleas  is  represented  as  marry- 
ing Nimue,^  whose  original  name,  which  was  Rhi- 
annon,  reached  this  form,  as  well  as  that  of 
"Vivien",  through  a  series  of  miscopyings  of  suc- 
cessive scribes.^ 

With  Pelles,  or  Pelleas,  is  associated  a  King 
Pellean,  or  Pellam,  his  son,  and,  equally  with  him, 
the  Keeper  of  the  Grail,  who  can  be  no  other  than 
Pryderi.^  Like  that  deity  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Math, 
he  is  defeated  by  one  of  the  gods  of  light.  The 
dealer  of  the  blow,  however,  is  not  Arthur,  as 
successor  to  Gwydion,  but  Balin,  the  Gallo- British 
sun-god  Belinus.^ 

»  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XI,  chap.  II.       ^  Ibid.,  Book  XVII,  chap.  V. 
3  Ibid.,  Book  XI,  chap.  ii.  *  Ibid.,  Book  XII,  chap.  v. 

°  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  283.         *  Morte  Darthur,  Book  IV,  chap.  XXIII. 
^  Rhys;  Arthurian  Legend.,  p.  284  and  note. 

8  The  subject  is  treated  at  length  by  Professor  Rhys  in  his  Arthurian  Legend, 
chap.  XII — "Pwyll  and  Pelles".  *  Morte  Darthur,  Book  II,  chap.  XV. 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      359 

Another  dark  deity,  Gwyn  son  of  Nudd,  we  dis- 
cover under  all  of  his  three  titles.  Called  variously 
''  Sir  Gwinas  "/  **  Sir  Guynas  '7  and  **  Sir  Gwen- 
baus  "^  by  Malory,  the  Welsh  Gwynwas  (or  Gwyn) 
is  altogether  on  Arthur's  side.  The  Cornish  Mel- 
was,  split  into  two  different  knights,  divides  his 
allegiance.  As  Sir  Melias,*  or  Meleaus,^  de  Lile 
(''of  the  Isle"),  he  is  a  Knight  of  the  Round 
Table,  though,  on  the  quarrel  between  Arthur  and 
Launcelot,  he  sides  with  the  knight  against  the 
king.  But  as  Sir  Meliagraunce,  or  Meliagaunce, 
it  is  he  who,  as  in  the  older  myth,  captures  Queen 
Guinevere  and  carries  her  off  to  his  castle.^  Under 
his  Somerset  name  of  Avallon,  or  Avallach,  he  is 
connected  with  the  episode  of  the  Grail.  King 
Evelake^  is  a  Saracen  ruler  who  was  converted  by 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  and  brought  by  him  to  Britain. 
In  his  convert's  enthusiasm,  he  attempted  the  quest 
of  the  holy  vessel,  but  was  not  allowed  to  succeed.^ 
As  a  consolation,  however,  it  was  divinely  promised 
him  that  he  should  not  die  until  he  had  seen  a 
knight  of  his  blood  in  the  ninth  degree  who  should 
achieve  it.  This  was  done  by  Sir  Percivale,  King 
Evelake  being  then  three  hundred  years  old.^ 

Turning  from  deities  of  darkness  to  deities  of 
light,  we  find  the  sky-god  figuring  largely  in  the 
Morte  Darthur.  The  Lludd  of  the  earlier  myth- 
ology is  Malory's  King  Loth,  or  Lot,  of  Orkney, ^° 

1  Morte  Darthur,  Book  I,  chap.  xii.  ^  jud..  Book  I,  chap.  xv. 

3  Ibid.,  Book  I,  chap.  IX,  *  Ibid.,  Book  XIII,  chap.  Xil. 

0  Ibid.,  Book  XIX,  chap.  xi.  «  Ibid.,  Book  XIX,  chap.  ii. 

7  Ibid.,  Book  XIII,  chap.  x.  »  md,^  Book  XIV,  chap.  iv. 

"*  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XIV,  chap.  iv.  i"  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  ii. 


360         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

through  an  intrigue  with  whose  wife  Arthur  be- 
comes the  father  of  Sir  Mordred.  Lot's  wife  was 
the  mother  also  of  Sir  Gawain,  whose  birth  Malory 
does  not,  however,  attribute  to  Arthur,  though  such 
must  have  been  the  original  form  of  the  myth.^  Sir 
Gawain,  of  the  Arthurian  legend,  is  the  Gwalchmei 
of  the  Welsh  stories,  the  successor  of  the  still  earlier 
Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes,  just  as  Sir  Mordred — the  Welsh 
Medrawt — corresponds  to  Lleu's  brother  Dylan. 
As  Sir  Mordred  retains  the  dark  character  of 
Medrawt,  so  Sir  Gawain,  even  in  Malory,^  shows 
the  attributes  of  a  solar  deity.  We  are  told  that 
his  strength  increased  gradually  from  dawn  till  high 
noon,  and  then  as  gradually  decreased  again — a  piece 
of  pagan  symbolism  which  forms  a  good  example  of 
the  appositeness  of  Sir  Edward  Strachey's  figure; 
for  it  stands  out  of  the  mediaeval  narrative  like  an 
ancient  brick  in  some  more  modern  building. 

The  Zeus  of  the  later  cycle,  Emrys  or  Myrddin, 
appears  in  the  Morte  Darthur  under  both  his  names. 
The  word  **  Emrys "  becomes  "  Bors  ",  and  King 
Bors  of  Gaul  is  made  a  brother  of  King  Ban  of 
Benwyck^ — that  is,  Brin  of  the  Square  Enclosure, 
the  ubiquitous  underworld  god.  Myrddin  we  meet 
under  no  such  disguise.  The  ever-popular  Merlin 
still  retains  intact  the  attributes  of  the  sky-god. 
He  remains  above,  and  apart  from  all  the  knights, 
higher  even  in  some  respects  than  King  Arthur, 
to  whom  he  stands  in  much  the  same  position  as 
Mdth  does  to  Gwydion  in  the   Mabinogi.*      Like 

1  op.  cit.,  pp.  21-22.  2  Morte  Darthur,  Book  IV,  chap,  xviii. 

*  Ibid.,  Book  I,  chap.  Viii.  *  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  23. 


liy  |ieruiissioii  of  I-'redeiick  llollj'er. 


THE   BEGUILING   OF   MERLIN 
From  the  Picture  by  Sir  Edward  Burne-Jones 


m^i^. 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      361 

Math,  he  is  an  enchanter,  and,  like  Math,  too,  who 
could  hear  everything  said  in  the  world,  in  however 
low  a  tone,  if  only  the  wind  met  it,  he  is  practically 
omniscient.  The  account  of  his  final  disappearance, 
as  told  in  the  Morte  Darthur,  is  only  a  re-embellish- 
ment of  the  original  story,  the  nature-myth  giving 
place  to  what  novelists  call  '*a  feminine  interest". 
Everyone  knows  how  the  great  magician  fell  into  a 
dotage  upon  the  **lady  of  the  lake"  whom  Malory 
calls  **Nimue",  and  Tennyson  ** Vivien"  —  both 
names  being  that  of  "  Rhiannon "  in  disguise. 
"  Merlin  would  let  her  have  no  rest,  but  always  he 
would  be  with  her  .  .  .  and  she  was  ever  passing 
weary  of  him,  and  fain  would  have  been  delivered 
of  him,  for  she  was  afeard  of  him  because  he  was  a 
devils  son,  and  she  could  not  put  him  away  by  no 
means.  And  so  on  a  time  it  happed  that  Merlin 
showed  to  her  in  a  rock  whereas  was  a  great 
wonder,  and  wrought  by  enchantment,  that  went 
under  a  great  stone.  So,  by  her  subtle  working, 
she  made  Merlin  to  go  under  that  stone  to  let  her 
wit  of  the  marvels  there,  but  she  wrought  so  there 
for  him  that  he  never  came  out  for  all  the  craft 
that  he  could  do.  And  so  she  departed  and  left 
Merlin."^ 

Merlin's  living  grave  is  still  to  be  seen  at  the  end 
of  the  Val  des  Fies,  in  the  forest  of  Br^cilien,  in 
Brittany.  The  tomb  of  stone  is  certainly  but  a 
prosaic  equivalent  for  the  tower  of  woven  air  in 
which  the  heaven-god  went  to  his  rest.  Still,  it  is 
not  quite  so  unpoetic  as  the  leather  sack  in  which 

1  Morte  Darthur,  Book  IV,  chap.  i. 


362         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Rhiannon,  the  original  of  Nimue,  caught  and  im- 
prisoned Gwawl,  the  earlier  Merlin,  like  a  badger 
in  a  bag.^ 

Elen,  Myrddin's  consort,  appears  in  Malory  as 
five  different  **  Elaines  ".  Two  of  them  are  wives 
of  the  dark  god,  under  his  names  of  **  King  Ban  "^ 
and  "  King  Nentres ''?  A  third  is  called  the 
daughter  of  King  Pellinore,  a  character  of  un- 
certain origin.*  But  the  two  most  famous  are  the 
ladies  who  loved  Sir  Launcelot — "  Elaine  the  Fair, 
Elaine  the  lovable,  Elaine  the  lily  maid  of  Astolat  ",^ 
and  the  luckier  and  less  scrupulous  Elaine,  daughter 
of  King  Pelles,  and  mother  of  Sir  Launcelot's  son, 
Galahad.^ 

But  it  is  time,  now  that  the  most  important 
figures  of  British  mythology  have  been  shown  under 
their  knightly  disguises,  and  their  place  in  Arthurian 
legend  indicated,  to  pass  on  to  some  account  of  the 
real  subject-matter  of  Sir  Thomas  Malory's  romance. 
Externally,  it  is  the  history  of  an  Arthur,  King  of 
Britain,  whom  most  people  of  Malory's  time  con- 
sidered as  eminently  a  historical  character.  Around 
this  central  narrative  of  Arthur's  reign  and  deeds 
are  grouped,  in  the  form  of  episodes,  the  personal 
exploits  of  the  knights  believed  to  have  supported 
him  by  forming  a  kind  of  household  guard.  But, 
with  the  exception  of  a  little  magnified  and  distorted 
legendary  history,  the  whole  cycle  of  romance  may 

/ 

1  See  chap,  xvii — "The  Adventures  of  the  Gods  of  Hades  ". 

*  Morte  Darthur,  Book  IV,  chap.  i.  '  Ibid.,  Book  I,  chap,  il. 

*  Ibid.,  Book  III,  chap.  XV. 

'  Whose  story  is  told  by  Tennyson  in  the  Idylls,  and  by  Malory  in  Book  XVIII 
of  the  Morte  Darthur.  '  Morte  Darihur,  Book  XI,  chaps,  ii  and  ill. 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      363 

be  ultimately  resolved  into  a  few  myths,  not  only 
retold,  but  recombined  in  several  forms  by  their 
various  tellers.  The  Norman  adapters  of  the 
Matiere  de  Bretagne  found  the  British  mythology 
already  in  process  of  transformation,  some  of  the 
gods  having  dwindled  into  human  warriors,  and 
others  into  hardly  less  human  druids  and  magicians. 
Under  their  hands  the  British  warriors  became 
Norman  knights,  who  did  their  deeds  of  prowess  in 
the  tilt-yard,  and  found  their  inspiration  in  the  fan- 
tastic chivalry  popularized  by  the  Trouveres,  while 
the  druids  put  off  their  still  somewhat  barbaric 
druidism  for  the  more  conventional  magic  of  the 
Latin  races.  More  than  this,  as  soon  as  the  real 
sequence  and  raison  d'Hre  of  the  tales  had  been  lost 
sight  of,  their  adapters  used  a  free  hand  in  reweaving 
them.  Most  of  the  romancers  had  their  favourite 
characters  whom  they  made  the  central  figure  in 
their  stories.  Sir  Gawain,  Sir  Percival,  Sir  Tris- 
trem,  and  Sir  Owain  (all  of  them  probably  once 
local  British  sun-gods)  appear  as  the  most  important 
personages  of  the  romances  called  after  their  names, 
stories  of  the  doughty  deeds  of  christened  knights 
who  had  little  left  about  them  either  of  Briton  or  of 
pagan. 

It  is  only  the  labours  of  the  modern  scholar  that 
can  bring  back  to  us,  at  this  late  date,  things  long 
forgotten  when  Malory's  book  was  issued  from 
Caxton's  press.  But  oblivion  is  not  annihilation, 
and  Professor  Rhys  points  out  to  us  the  old  myths 
lying  embedded  in  their  later  setting  with  almost 
the  same   certainty  with  which  the   geologist  can 


364         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

show  us  the  fossils  in  the  rock.^  Thus  treated,  they 
resolve  themselves  into  three  principal  motifs,  pro- 
minent everywhere  in  Celtic  mythology:  the  birth 
of  the  sun-god;  the  struggle  between  light  and 
darkness;  and  the  raiding  of  the  underworld  by 
friendly  gods  for  the  good  of  man. 

The  first  has  been  already  dealt  with.^  It  is  the 
retelling  of  the  story  of  the  origin  of  the  sun-god 
in  the  Mabinogi  of  Math,  son  of  Mathonwy.  For 
Gwydion  we  now  have  Arthur ;  instead  of  Arianrod, 
the  wife  of  the  superannuated  sky-god  Nwyvre,  we 
find  the  wife  of  King  Lot,  the  superannuated  sky- 
god  Lludd;  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes  rises  again  as  Sir 
Gawain  (Gwalchmei),  and  Dylan  as  Sir  Mordred 
(Medrawt);  while  the  wise  Merlin,  the  Jupiter  of 
the  new  system,  takes  the  place  of  his  wise  proto- 
type, Math.  Connected  with  this  first  myth  is  the 
second — the  struggle  between  light  and  darkness, 
of  which  there  are  several  versions  in  the  Morte 
Darthur.  The  leading  one  is  the  rebellion  of  the 
evilly-disposed  Sir  Mordred  against  Arthur  and  Sir 
Gawain;  while,  on  other  stages,  Balan — the  dark 
god  Bran — fights  with  Balin — the  sun-god  Belinus; 
and  the  same  Balin,  or  Belinus,  gives  an  almost 
mortal  stroke  to  Pellam,  the  Pryderi  of  the  older 
mythology. 

The  same  myth  has  also  a  wider  form,  in  which 
the  battle  is  waged  for  possession  of  a  maiden. 
Thus  (to  seek  no  other  instances)  Gwynhwyvar  was 
contended  for  by  Arthur  and   Medrawt,  or,  in  an 

^  See  his  Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend. 

2  See  chap,  xxi — "  The  Mythological  '  Coming  of  Arthur ' ". 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      365 

earlier  form  of  the  myth,  by  Arthur  and  Gwyn.  In 
the  Morte  Darthur,  Gwyn,  under  the  corruption  of 
his  Cornish  name  Melwas  into  **  Sir  Meliagraunce  ", 
still  captures  Guinevere,  but  it  is  no  longer  Arthur 
who  rescues  her.  That  task,  or  privilege,  has  fallen 
to  a  new  champion.  It  is  Sir  Launcelot  who  follows 
Sir  Meliagraunce,  defeats  and  slays  him,  and  rescues 
the  fair  captive.^  But  Sir  Launcelot,  it  must  be 
stated — probably  to  the  surprise  of  those  to  whom 
the  Arthurian  story  without  Launcelot  and  Queen 
Guinevere  must  seem  almost  like  the  play  of 
**  Hamlet  with  Hamlet  left  out ", — is  unknown  to 
the  original  tradition.  Welsh  song  and  story  are 
silent  with  regard  to  him,  and  he  is  not  improbably 
a  creation  of  some  Norman  romancer  who  calmlv 
appropriated  to  his  hero's  credit  deeds  earlier  told 
of  other  "knights". 

But  the  romantic  treatment  of  these  two  myths 
by  the  adapters  of  the  Matiere  de  Bretagne  are  of 
smaller  interest  to  us  at  the  present  day  than  that 
of  the  third.  The  attraction  of  the  Arthurian  story 
lies  less  in  the  battles  of  Arthur  or  the  loves  of 
Guinevere  than  in  the  legend  that  has  given  it  its 
lasting  popularity — the  Christian  romance  of  the 
Quest  of  the  Holy  Grail.  So  great  and  various 
has  been  the  inspiration  of  this  legend  to  noble 
works  both  of  art  and  literature  that  it  seems  almost 
a  kind  of  sacrilege  to  trace  it  back,  like  all  the  rest 
of  Arthur's  story,  to  a  paganism  which  could  not 
have  even  understood,  much  less  created,  its  mys- 
tical  beauty.      None  the   less   is   the  whole   story 

1  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XIX,  chaps,  i-ix. 


366         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

directly  evolved  from  primitive  pagan  myths  con- 
cerning a  miraculous  cauldron  of  fertility  and  in- 
spiration. 

In  the  later  romances,  the  Holy  Grail  is  a 
Christian  relic  of  marvellous  potency.  It  had  held 
the  Paschal  lamb  eaten  at  the  Last  Supper ;i  and, 
after  the  death  of  Christ,  Joseph  of  Arimathea  had 
filled  it  with  the  Saviour's  blood.^  But  before  it 
received  this  colouring,  it  had  been  the  magic  caul- 
dron of  all  the  Celtic  mythologies — the  Dagda's 
''  Undry "  which  fed  all  who  came  to  it,  and  from 
which  none  went  away  unsatisfied;^  Bran's  cauldron 
of  Renovation,  which  brought  the  dead  back  to  life;* 
the  cauldron  of  Ogyrvran  the  Giant,  from  which  the 
Muses  ascended;^  the  cauldrons  captured  by  Cuchu- 
lainn  from  the  King  of  the  Shadowy  City,^  and  by 
Arthur  from  the  chief  of  Hades  ;^  as  well  as  several 
other  mythic  vessels  of  less  note. 

In  its  transition  from  pagan  to  Christian  form, 
hardly  one  of  the  features  of  the  ancient  myth  has 
been  really  obscured.  We  may  recount  the  chief 
attributes,  as  Taliesin  tells  them  in  his  **  Spoiling  of 
Annwn",  of  the  cauldron  captured  by  Arthur.  It  was 
the  property  of  Pwyll,  and  of  his  son  Pryderi,  who 
lived  in  a  kingdom  of  the  other  world  called,  among 
other  titles,  the  "  Revolving  Castle ",  the  '*  Four- 
cornered    Castle ",    the    "  Castle   of   Revelry ",    the 

^  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XVII,  chap.  xx. 

-Ibid.,  Book  II,  chap,  xvi;  Book  XI,  chap.  xiv. 

3  See  chap,  v— ' '  The  Gods  of  the  Gaels  ". 

•^See  chap,  xviii — "  The  Wooing  of  Branwen  and  the  Beheading  of  Br4n  " 

*See  chap,  xxi — "  The  Mythological  '  Coming  of  Arthur  '  ". 

6  See  chap,  xii— "  The  Irish  Iliad  ". 

^  Chap  xxi— "  The  Mythological  '  Coming  of  Arthur  '  ". 


THE    CAULDRON    OF    INSPIRATION 
From  the  Draiving  by  E.  Wallcousim 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      367 

''Kingly  Castle",  the  "Glass  Castle",  and  the 
"  Castle  of  Riches  ".  This  place  was  surrounded  by 
the  sea,  and  in  other  ways  made  difficult  of  access; 
there  was  no  lack  of  wine  there,  and  its  happy 
inhabitants  spent  with  music  and  feasting  an  exist- 
ence which  neither  disease  nor  old  age  could  assail. 
As  for  the  cauldron,  it  had  a  rim  of  pearls  around 
its  edge;  the  fire  beneath  it  was  kept  fanned  by  the 
breaths  of  nine  maidens;  it  spoke,  doubtless  in 
words  of  prophetic  wisdom;  and  it  would  not  cook 
the  food  of  a  perjurer  or  coward.^  Here  we  have 
considerable  data  on  which  to  base  a  parallel  be- 
tween the  pagan  cauldron  and  the  Christian  Grail. 
Nor  have  we  far  to  go  in  search  of  corre- 
spondences, for  they  are  nearly  all  preserved  in 
Malory's  romance.  The  mystic  vessel  was  kept  by 
King  Pelles,  who  is  Pwyll,  in  a  castle  called  ''  Car- 
bonek  ",  a  name  which  resolves  itself,  in  the  hands 
of  the  philologist,  into  Caer  bannawg,  the  ''square" 
or  "four-cornered  castle" — in  other  words,  the 
Caer  Pedryvan  of  Taliesin's  poem.^  Of  the  char- 
acter of  the  place  as  a  "  Castle  of  Riches  "  and  a 
"  Castle  of  Revelry  ",  where  "  bright  wine  was  the 
drink  of  the  host ",  we  have  more  than  a  hint  in  the 
account,  twice  given,^  of  how,  upon  the  appearance 
of  the  Grail — borne,  it  should  be  noticed,  by  a 
maiden  or  angel — the  hall  was  filled  with  good 
odours,  and  every  knight  found  on  the  table  all  the 
kinds  of  meat  and  drink  he  could  imagine  as  most 


1  Chap.  XXI—  "  The  Mythological  '  Coming  of  Artkur ' ". 

3  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  305. 

^Morte  Darthur,  Book  XI,  chaps,  ii  and  IV. 


368         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

desirable.  It  could  not  be  seen  by  sinners,*  a 
Christian  refinement  of  the  savage  idea  of  a  pot 
that  would  not  cook  a  cowards  food;  but  the  sight 
of  it  alone  would  cure  of  wounds  and  sickness  those 
who  approached  it  faithfully  and  humbly,^  and  in  its 
presence  neither  old  age  nor  sickness  could  oppress 
them.^  And,  though  in  Malory  we  find  no  refer- 
ence either  to  the  spot  having  been  surrounded  by 
water,  or  to  the  castle  as  a  ** revolving"  one,  we 
have  only  to  turn  from  the  Morte  Darthur  to  the 
romance  entitled  the  Seint  Greal  to  discover  both. 
Gwalchmei,  going  to  the  castle  of  King  Peleur 
(Pryderi),  finds  it  encircled  by  a  great  water,  while 
Peredur,  approaching  the  same  place,  sees  it  turning 
with  greater  speed  than  the  swiftest  wind.  More- 
over, archers  on  the  walls  shoot  so  vigorously  that 
no  armour  can  resist  their  shafts,  which  explains 
how  it  happened  that,  of  those  that  went  with 
Arthur,  "except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer 
Sidi  ".* 

It  is  noticeable  that  Arthur  himself  never  at- 
tempts the  quest  of  the  Grail,  though  it  was  he 
who  had  achieved  its  pagan  original.  We  find  in 
Malory  four  competitors  for  the  mantle  of  Arthur 
— Sir  Pelleas,^  Sir  Bors,  Sir  Percivale,  and  Sir 
Galahad.^  The  first  of  these  may  be  put  out  of 
court  at  once.  Sir  Pelleas,  who,  being  himself  Pelles, 

"^  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XVI,  chap.  v. 

ilbid..  Book  XI,  chap,  xiv;  Book  XII,  chap,  iv;  Book  XIII,  chap,  xviii. 
s  Not  mentioned  by  Malory,  but  stated  in  the  romance  called  Seint  Greal, 
*Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  276-277;  302. 
'  Morte  Darthur,  Book  IV,  chap.  XXIX. 

^Ibid.,  Book  XVII,  chap.  XX,  in  which  Sir  Bors,  Sir  Percivale,  and  Sir  Galahad 
are  ajl  fed  from  the  Sangreal. 


By  permission  of  Frederick  Ilollyer. 

SIR   GALAHAD 
From  the  Picture  by  G.  F.  Watts,  R.A. 


The  Gods  as  King  Arthur s  Knights      369 

or  Pwyll,  the  keeper  of  it,  could  have  had  no 
reason  for  such  exertions.  At  the  second  we  may- 
look  doubtfully;  for  Sir  Bors  is  no  other  than 
Emrys,  or  Myrddin/  and,  casting  back  to  the 
earlier  British  mythology,  we  do  not  find  the 
sky -god  personally  active  in  securing  boons  by 
force  or  craft  from  the  underworld.  The  other 
two  have  better  claims  —  Sir  Percivale  and  Sir 
Galahad.  **  Sir  Percivale  "  is  the  Norman-French 
name  for  Peredur,^  the  hero  of  a  story  in  the  Red 
Book  of  Hergest^  which  gives  the  oldest  form  of 
a  Grail  quest  we  have.  It  is  anterior  to  the  Nor- 
man romances,  and  forms  almost  a  connecting-link 
between  tales  of  mythology  and  of  chivalry.  Pere- 
dur,  or  Sir  Percivale,  therefore,  is  the  oldest,  most 
primitive,  of  Grail  seekers.  On  the  other  hand,  Sir 
Galahad  is  the  latest  and  youngest.  But  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  Galahad,  in  Welsh  **  Gwal- 
chaved ",  the  **  Falcon  of  Summer ",  is  the  same 
solar  hero  as  Gawain,  in  Welsh  **  Gwalchmei ",  the 
**  Falcon  of  May".*  Both  are  made,  in  the  story 
of  *'Kulhwch  and  Olwen",  sons  of  the  same  mother, 
Gwyar.  Sir  Gawain  himself  is,  in  one  Arthurian 
romance,  the  achiever  of  the  Grail.^  It  is  needless 
to  attempt  to  choose  between  these  two.  Both 
have  the  attributes  of  sun-gods.  Gwalchmei,  the 
successor  of  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes,  and  Peredur  Paladr- 
hir,  that  is  to  say,  the  **  Spearman  with  the  Long 

^  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  162.  ^Ibid.,  p.  133. 

*  Translated  by  Lady  Guest  in  her  Mabinogion,  under  the  title  of  Peredur,  the 
Son  of  Evrawc. 

*Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  169.      But  see  whole  of  chap,  viii — "Galahad 
and  Gwalchaved". 

^  The  German  romance  Din  Krdne,  by  Heinrich  von  dem  TArlin. 

( B  219 )  2  A. 


370         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Shaft  ",^  may  be  allowed  to  claim  equal  honours. 
What  is  important  is  that  the  quest  of  the  Grail, 
once  the  chief  treasure  of  Hades,  is  still  accom- 
plished by  one  who  takes  in  later  legend  the  place 
of  Lieu  Llaw  Gyffes  and  Lugh  Lamhfada  in  the 
earlier  British  and  Gaelic  myths  as  a  long-armed 
solar  deity  victorious  in  his  strife  against  the  Powers 
of  Darkness. 

^  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  71, 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

THE  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  GODS 

If  there  be  love  of  fame  in  celestial  minds,  those 
gods  might  count  themselves  fortunate  who  shared 
in  the  transformation  of  Arthur.  Their  divinity 
had  fallen  from  them,  but  in  their  new  r61es,  as 
heroes  of  romance,  they  entered  upon  vivid  reincar- 
nations. The  names  of  Arthurs  Knights  might 
almost  be  described  as  ** household  words",  while 
the  gods  who  had  no  portion  in  the  Table  Round 
are  known  only  to  those  who  busy  themselves  with 
antiquarian  lore.  It  is  true  that  a  few  folk- tales 
still  survive  in  the  remoter  parts  of  Wales,  in  which 
the  names  of  such  ancient  British  deities  as  Gwydion, 
Gwyn,  Arianrod,  and  Dylan  appear,  but  it  is  in 
such  a  chaos  of  jumbled  and  distorted  legend  that 
one  finds  it  hard  to  pick  out  even  the  slenderest 
thread  of  story.  They  have  none  of  the  definite 
coherence  of  the  contemporary  Gaelic  folk-tales 
quoted  in  a  previous  chapter  as  still  preserving 
the  myths  about  Goibniu,  Lugh,  Cian,  Manannin, 
Ethniu,  and  Balor.  Indeed,  they  have  reached  such 
a  stage  of  disintegration  that  they  can  hardly  now 
survive  another  generation.^ 

There  have  been,  however,  other  paths  by  which 
the  fame  of  a  god  might   descend  to  a  posterity 

^See,  for  example,  a  folk-tale,  pp.  117-123  in  Rhys's  Celtic  Folklore. 

871 


372         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

which  would  no  longer  credit  his  divinity.  The 
rolls  of  early  British  history  were  open  to  welcome 
any  number  of  mythical  personages,  provided  that 
their  legends  were  attractive.  Geoffrey  of  Mon- 
mouth's famous  Historia  Britonum  is,  under  its 
grave  pretence  of  exact  history,  as  mythological  as 
the  Morte  Darthur,  or  even  the  Mabinogion.  The 
annals  of  early  British  saintship  were  not  less 
accommodating.  A  god  whose  tradition  was  too 
potent  to  be  ignored  or  extinguished  was  canonized, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  by  clerics  who  held  as  an 
axiom  that  **the  toleration  of  the  cromlech  facili- 
tated the  reception  of  the  Gospel.^"  Only  the  most 
irreconcilable  escaped  them — such  a  one  as  Gwyn 
son  of  Nudd,  who,  found  almost  useless  by  Geoffrey 
and  intractable  by  the  monkish  writers,  remains  the 
last  survivor  of  the  old  gods — dwindled  to  the  pro- 
portions of  a  fairy,  but  unsubdued. 

This  part  of  resistance  is  perhaps  the  most  digni- 
fied ;  for  deities  can  be  sadly  changed  by  the  caprices 
of  their  euhemerizers.  Don,  whom  we  knew  as  the 
mother  of  the  heaven  gods,  seems  strangely  described 
as  a  king  of  Lochlin  and  Dublin,  who  led  the  Irish 
into  north  Wales  in  a.d.  267.^  More  recognizable 
is  his  son  Gwydion,  who  introduced  the  knowledge 
of  letters  into  the  country  of  his  adoption.  The 
dynasty  of  "  King"  Don,  according  to  a  manuscript 
in  the  collection  of  Mr.  Edward  Williams — better 
known  under  his  bardic  name  of  lolo  Morgan wg — 
held  north  Wales  for  a  hundred  and  twenty-nine 

^  Stephens's  Preliminary  Dissertation  to  his  translation  of  Aneurin's  Gododin, 
«  lolo  MSS.,  p.  471. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        373 

years,  when  the  North  British  king,  Cunedda,  in- 
vaded the  country,  defeated  the  Irish  in  a  great 
battle,  and  drove  them  across  sea  to  the  Isle  of  Man. 
This  battle  is  historical,  and,  putting  D6n  and  Gwy- 
dion  out  of  the  question,  probably  represented  the 
last  stand  of  the  Gael,  in  the  extreme  west  of  Britain, 
against  the  second  and  stronger  wave  of  Celtic  in- 
vasion. In  the  same  collection  of  lolo  Manuscripts 
is  found  a  curious,  and  even  comic,  euhemeristic 
version  of  the  strange  myth  of  the  Bone  Prison  of 
Oeth  and  Anoeth  which  Manawyddan  son  of  Llyr, 
built  in  Gower.  The  new  reading  makes  that  ghastly 
abode  a  real  building,  constructed  out  of  the  bones  of 
the  **  Caesarians  "  (Romans)  killed  in  battle  with  the 
Cymri.  It  consisted  of  numerous  chambers,  some  of 
large  bones  and  some  of  small,  some  above  ground 
and  some  under.  Prisoners  of  war  were  placed  in 
the  more  comfortable  cells,  the  underground  dun- 
geons being  kept  for  traitors  to  their  country. 
Several  times  the  *'  Caesarians"  demolished  the 
prison,  but,  each  time,  the  Cymri  rebuilt  it  stronger 
than  before.  At  last,  however,  the  bones  decayed, 
and,  being  spread  upon  the  ground,  made  an  excel- 
lent manure!  "  From  that  time  forth"  the  people  of 
the  neighbourhood  "had  astonishing  crops  of  wheat 
and  barley  and  of  every  other  grain  for  many  years''.^ 
It  is  not,  however,  in  these,  so  to  speak,  un- 
authorized narratives  that  we  can  best  refind  our 
British  deities,  but  in  the  compact,  coherent,  and 
at  times  almost  convincing  Historia  Britonum  of 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  published  in  the  first  half  of 

*  lolo  MSS.t  pp.  597-600. 


374         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

the  twelfth  century,  and  for  hundreds  of  years  gravely 
quoted  as  the  leading  authority  on  the  early  history 
of  our  islands.  The  modern  critical  spirit  has,  of 
course,  relegated  it  to  the  region  of  fable.  We  can 
no  longer  accept  the  pleasant  tradition  of  the  descent 
of  the  Britons  from  the  survivors  of  Troy,  led  west- 
ward in  search  of  a  new  home  by  Brutus,  the  great- 
grandson  of  the  pious  ^neas.  Nor  indeed  does 
any  portion  of  the  ** History",  from  ^neas  to  Athel- 
stan,  quite  persuade  the  latter-day  reader.  Its 
kings  succeed  one  another  in  plausible  sequence, 
but  they  themselves  are  too  obviously  the  heroes 
of  popular  legend. 

A  large  part  of  Geoffrey's  chronicle — two  books ^ 
out  of  twelve — is,  of  course,  devoted  to  Arthur.  In 
it  he  tells  the  story  of  that  paladin's  conquests,  not 
only  in  his  own  country,  against  the  Saxons,  the 
Irish,  the  Scots,  and  the  Picts,  but  over  all  western 
Europe.  We  see  the  British  champion,  after  annex- 
ing Ireland,  Iceland,  Gothland,  and  the  Orkneys, 
following  up  these  minor  victories  by  subduing  Nor- 
way, Dacia  (by  which  Denmark  seems  to  have  been 
meant),  Aquitaine,  and  Gaul.  After  such  triumphs 
there  was  clearly  nothing  left  for  him  but  the  over- 
throw of  the  Roman  empire;  and  this  he  had  prac- 
tically achieved  when  the  rebellion  of  Mordred 
brought  him  home  to  his  death,  or  rather  (for  even 
Geoffrey  does  not  quite  lose  hold  of  the  belief  in 
the  undying  Arthur)  to  be  carried  to  the  island  of 
Avallon  to  be  healed  of  his  wounds,  the  crown  of 
Britain  falling  to  "his  kinsman  Constantine,  the  son 

1  Historia  Britonum.     Books  IX,  X,  and  chaps,  i  and  ii  of  XI. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       375 

of  Cador,  Duke  of  Cornwall,  in  the  five  hundred 
and  forty-second  year  of  our  Lord's  incarnation".^ 
Upon  the  more  personal  incidents  connected  with 
Arthur,  Geoffrey  openly  professes  to  keep  silence, 
possibly  regarding  them  as  not  falling  within  the 
province  of  his  history,  but  we  are  told  shortly  how 
Mordred  took  advantage  of  Arthur's  absence  on  the 
Continent  to  seize  the  throne,  marry  Guanhamara 
(Guinevere),  and  ally  himself  with  the  Saxons,  only 
to  be  defeated  at  that  fatal  battle  called  by  Geoffrey 
**  Cambula",  in  which  Mordred,  Arthur,  and  Walgan 
— the  **  Sir  Gawain"  of  Malory  and  the  Gwalchmei 
of  the  earlier  legends — all  met  their  dooms. 

We  find  the  gods  of  the  older  generation  stand- 
ing in  the  same  position  with  regard  to  Arthur  in 
Geoffrey's  ''  History"  as  they  do  in  the  later  Welsh 
triads  and  tales.  Though  rulers,  they  are  yet  his 
vassals.  In  ''three  brothers  of  royal  blood",  called 
Lot,  Urian,  and  Augusel,  who  are  represented  as 
having  been  chiefs  in  the  north,  we  may  discern 
Lludd,  Urien,  and  Arawn.  To  these  three  Arthur 
restored  '*the  rights  of  their  ancestors",  handing 
over  the  semi-sovereignty  of  Scotland  to  Augusel, 
giving  Urian  the  government  of  Murief  (Moray), 
and  re-establishing  Lot  **in  the  consulship  of  Lou- 
donesia  (Lothian),  and  the  other  provinces  belong- 
ing to  him".^  Two  other  rulers  subject  to  him  are 
Gunvasius,  King  of  the  Orkneys,  and  Malvasius, 
King   of   Iceland,^  in  whom  we  recognize   Gwyn, 


1  Historia  Britonum,  Book  XI,  chap.  ii.  '  Ibid.,  Book  IX,  chap.  IX. 

3  Ibid.,  Book  IX,  chap.  xii.     They  appear  also  as  Guanius,  King  of  the  Huns, 
and  Melga,  King  of  the  Picts,  in  Book  V,  chap.  xvi. 


376         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

under  Latinized  forms  of  his  Welsh  name  Gwynwas 
and  his  Cornish  name  Melwas.  But  it  is  char- 
acteristic of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  loose  hold 
upon  his  materials  that,  not  content  with  having 
connected  several  of  these  gods  with  Arthur's  period, 
he  further  endows  them  with  reigns  of  their  own. 
"  Urien"  was  Arthurs  vassal,  but  '*  Urianus"  was 
himself  King  of  Britain  centuries  before  Arthur 
was  born.  ^  Lud  (that  is,  Lludd)  succeeded  his  father 
Beli.^  We  hear  nothing  of  his  silver  hand,  but 
we  learn  that  he  was  **  famous  for  the  building  of 
cities,  and  for  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Trinovantum*, 
which  he  also  surrounded  with  innumerable  towers 
.  .  .  and  though  he  had  many  other  cities,  yet  he 
loved  this  above  them  all,  and  resided  in  it  the 
greater  part  of  the  year;  for  which  reason  it  was 
afterwards  called  Kaerlud,  and  by  the  corruption 
of  the  word,  Caerlondon;  and  again  by  change  of 
languages,  in  process  of  time,  London;  as  also 
by  foreigners  who  arrived  here,  and  reduced  this 
country  under  their  subjection,  it  was  called 
Londres.  At  last,  when  he  was  dead,  his  body 
was  buried  by  the  gate  which  to  this  time  is 
called  in  the  British  tongue  after  his  name 
Parthlud,  and  in  the  Saxon,  Ludesgata."  He  was 
succeeded  by  his  brother,  Cassibellawn  (Cassi- 
velaunus),  during  whose  reign  Julius  Caesar  first 
invaded  Britain. 

Lludd,  however,  is  not  entirely  dependent  upon 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  for  his  reputation  as  a  king 

1  Historia  Britonum,  Book  III,  chap.  XIX.         '  Ibid.,  Book  HI,  chap.  xx. 

'•^  I.e.  London,  under  its  traditionary  earlier  name,  Troja  Nova,  given  it  by  Brutus. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        377 

of  Britain.  One  of  the  old  Welsh  romances/  trans- 
lated by  Lady  Charlotte  Guest  in  her  Mabinogion, 
relates  the  rebuilding  of  London  by  Lludd  in 
almost  the  same  words  as  Geoffrey.  The  story 
which  these  pseudo-historical  details  introduce  is, 
however,  an  obviously  mythological  one.  It  tells 
us  how,  in  the  days  of  Lludd,  Britain  was  oppressed 
by  three  plagues.  The  first  was  the  arrival  of  a 
strange  race  of  sorcerers  called  the  **  Coranians",^ 
who  had  three  qualities  which  made  them  un- 
popular; they  paid  their  way  in  *' fairy  money", 
which,  though  apparently  real,  returned  afterwards 
— like  the  shields,  horses,  and  hounds  made  by 
Gwydion  son  of  Don,  to  deceive  Pryderi — into 
the  fungus  out  of  which  it  had  been  charmed  by 
magic;  they  could  hear  everything  that  was  said 
over  the  whole  of  Britain,  in  however  low  a  tone, 
provided  only  that  the  wind  met  it;  and  they 
could  not  be  injured  by  any  weapon.  The  second 
was  **a  shriek  that  came  on  every  May  eve,  over 
every  hearth  in  the  Island  of  Britain,  and  went 
through  people's  hearts  and  so  scared  them  that  the 
men  lost  their  hue  and  their  strength,  and  the  women 
their  children,  and  the  young  men  and  the  maidens 
their  senses,  and  all  the  animals  and  trees  and  the 
earth  and  the  waters  were  left  barren".  The  third 
was  a  disappearance  of  the  food  hoarded  in  the 
king's  palace,  which  was  so  complete  that  a  year's 
provisions  vanished  in  a  single  night,  and  so  mys- 
terious that  no  one  could  ever  find  out  its  cause. 

^  The  Story  of  Lludd  and  Llevelys. 

2  The  name  means  "dwarfs".     Rhys:  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  606. 


378         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

By  the  advice  of  his  nobles,  Lludd  went  to  France 
to  obtain  the  help  of  its  king,  his  brother  Llevelys, 
who  was  **a  man  great  of  counsel  and  wisdom". 
In  order  to  be  able  to  consult  with  his  brother  with- 
out being  overheard  by  the  Coranians,  Llevelys 
caused  a  long  tube  of  brass  to  be  made,  through 
which  they  talked  to  one  another.  The  sorcerer 
tribe,  however,  got  to  know  of  it,  and,  though  they 
could  not  hear  what  was  being  said  inside  the  speak- 
ing-tube, they  sent  a  demon  into  it,  who  whispered 
insulting  messages  up  and  down  it,  as  though  from 
one  brother  to  the  other.  But  Lludd  and  Llevelys 
knew  one  another  too  well  to  be  deceived  by  this, 
and  they  drove  the  demon  out  of  the  tube  by  flood- 
ing it  with  wine.  Then  Llevelys  told  Lludd  to  take 
certain  insects,  which  he  would  give  him,  and  pound 
them  in  water.  When  the  water  was  sufficiently 
permeated  with  their  essence,  he  was  to  call  both 
his  own  people  and  the  Coranians  together,  as 
though  for  a  conference,  and,  in  the  midst  of  the 
meeting,  to  cast  it  over  all  of  them  alike.  The 
water,  though  harmless  to  his  own  people,  would 
nevertheless  prove  a  deadly  poison  to  the  Coranians. 

As  for  the  shriek,  Llevelys  explained  it  to  be 
raised  by  a  dragon.  This  monster  was  the  Red 
Dragon  of  Britain,  and  it  raised  the  shriek  because 
it  was  being  attacked  by  the  White  Dragon  of  the 
Saxons,  which  was  trying  to  overcome  and  destroy 
it.  The  French  king  told  his  brother  to  measure 
the  length  and  breadth  of  Britain,  and,  when  he 
had  found  the  exact  centre  of  the  island,  to  cause 
a  pit  to  be  dug  there.     In  this  pit  was  to  be  placed 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       379 

a  vessel  containing  the  best  mead  that  could  be 
made,  with  a  covering  of  satin  over  it  to  hide  it. 
Lludd  was  then  to  watch  from  some  safe  place. 
The  dragons  would  appear  and  fight  in  the  air 
until  they  were  exhausted,  then  they  would  fall 
together  on  to  the  top  of  the  satin  cloth,  and  so 
draw  it  down  with  them  into  the  vessel  full  of 
mead.  Naturally  they  would  drink  the  mead, 
and,  equally  naturally,  they  would  then  sleep.  As 
soon  as  Lludd  was  sure  that  they  were  helpless, 
he  was  to  go  to  the  pit,  wrap  the  satin  cloth  round 
both  of  them,  and  bury  them  together  in  a  stone 
coffin  in  the  strongest  place  in  Britain.  If  this 
were  safely  done,  there  would  be  no  more  heard 
of  the  shriek. 

And  the  disappearance  of  the  food  was  caused 
by  '*a  mighty  man  of  magic",  who  put  everyone 
to  sleep  by  charms  before  he  removed  the  king's 
provisions.  Lludd  was  to  watch  for  him,  sitting 
by  the  side  of  a  cauldron  full  of  cold  water.  As 
often  as  he  felt  the  approach  of  drowsiness,  he 
was  to  plunge  into  the  cauldron.  Thus  he  would 
be  able  to  keep  awake  and  frustrate  the  thief. 

So  Lludd  came  back  to  Britain.  He  pounded  the 
insects  in  the  water,  and  then  summoned  both  the 
men  of  Britain  and  the  Coranians  to  a  meeting.  In 
the  midst  of  it,  he  sprinkled  the  water  over  everyone 
alike.  The  natives  took  no  harm  from  this  mytho- 
logical ** beetle  powder",  but  the  Coranians  died. 

Lludd  was  then  ready  to  deal  with  the  dragons. 
His  careful  measurements  proved  that  the  centre 
of  the  island  of  Britain  was  at  Oxford,  and  there  he 


3^0         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

caused  the  pit  to  be  dug,  with  the  vessel  of  mead  in 
it,  hidden  by  the  satin  covering.  Having  made  every- 
thing ready,  he  watched,  and  soon  saw  the  dragons 
appear.  For  a  long  time  they  fought  desperately 
in  the  air;  then  they  fell  down  together  on  to  the 
satin  cloth,  and,  drawing  it  after  them,  subsided 
into  the  mead.  Lludd  waited  till  they  were  quite 
silent,  and  then  pulled  them  out,  folded  them  care- 
fully in  the  wrapping,  and  took  them  to  the  district 
of  Snowdon,  where  he  buried  them  in  the  strong 
fortress  whose  remains,  near  Beddgelert,  are  still 
called  *'  Dinas  Emrys ".  After  this  the  terrible 
shriek  was  not  heard  again  until  Merlin  had  them 
dug  up,  five  hundred  years  later,  when  they  recom- 
menced fighting,  and  the  red  dragon  drove  the 
white  one  out  of  Britain. 

Last  of  all,  Lludd  prepared  a  great  banquet  in 
his  hall,  and  watched  over  it,  armed,  with  the 
cauldron  of  water  near  him.  In  the  middle  of  the 
night,  he  heard  soft,  drowsy  music,  such  as  nearly 
put  him  to  sleep;  but  he  kept  awake  by  repeatedly 
dipping  himself  in  the  cold  water.  Just  before  dawn 
a  huge  man,  clad  in  armour,  came  into  the  hall, 
carrying  a  basket,  which  he  began  to  load  with  the 
viands  on  the  table.  Like  the  bag  in  which  Pwyll 
captured  Gwawl,  its  holding  capacity  seemed  end- 
less. However,  the  man  filled  it  at  last,  and  was 
carrying  it  out,  when  Lludd  stopped  him.  They 
fought,  and  Lludd  conquered  the  man  of  magic,  and 
made  him  his  vassal.  Thus  the  **  Three  Plagues 
of  Britain  "  came  to  an  end. 

Lludd,  in  changing  from  god  to  king,  seems  to 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       381 

have  lost  most  of  his  old  mythological  attributes. 
Even  his  daughter  Creudylad  is  taken  from  him  and 
given  to  another  of  the  ancient  British  deities.  Why 
Lludd,  the  sky-god,  should  have  been  confounded 
with  Llyr,  the  sea-god,  is  not  very  apparent,  but  it  is 
certain  that  ''Creudylad"  of  the  early  Welsh  legends 
and  poems  is  the  same  as  Geoffreys  *'Cordeilla" 
and  Shakespeare's  ''Cordelia".  The  great  dramatist 
was  ultimately  indebted  to  the  Celtic  mythology  for 
the  groundwork  of  the  legend  which  he  wove  into 
the  tragic  story  ol  King  Lear.  "  Leir",  as  Geoffrey 
calls  him,^  was  the  son  of  Bladud,  who  built  Caer 
Badus  (Bath),  and  perished,  like  Icarus,  as  the  re- 
sult of  an  accident  with  a  flying-machine  of  his  own 
invention.  Having  no  sons,  but  three  daughters, 
Gonorilla,  Regan,  and  Cordeilla,  he  thought  in  his 
old  age  of  dividing  his  kingdom  among  them.  But, 
first  of  all,  he  decided  to  make  trial  of  their  affection 
for  him,  with  the  idea  of  giving  the  best  portions  of 
his  realm  to  the  most  worthy.  Gonorilla,  the  eldest, 
replied  to  his  question  of  how  much  she  loved  him, 
"  that  she  called  heaven  to  witness,  she  loved  him 
more  than  her  own  soul".  Regan  answered  "with 
an  oath,  'that  she  could  not  otherwise  express  her 
thoughts,  but  that  she  loved  him  above  all  creatures'". 
But  when  it  came  to  Cordeilla's  turn,  the  youngest 
daughter,  disgusted  with  her  sisters'  hypocrisy,  spoke 
after  a  quite  different  fashion.  '"My  father,'  said 
she,  '  is  there  any  daughter  that  can  love  her  father 
more  than  duty  requires?  In  my  opinion,  whoever 
pretends  to  it,   must  disguise   her  real  sentiments 

1  Historia  Britonum,  Book  II,  chap,  x-xiv. 


382         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

under  the  veil  of  flattery.  I  have  always  loved  you 
as  a  father,  nor  do  I  yet  depart  from  my  purposed 
duty;  and  if  you  insist  to  have  something  more 
extorted  from  me,  hear  now  the  greatness  of  my 
affection,  which  I  always  bear  you,  and  take  this 
for  a  short  answer  to  all  your  questions;  look  how 
much  you  have,  so  much  is  your  value,  and  so  much 
do  I  love  you.'"  Her  enraged  father  immediately 
bestowed  his  kingdom  upon  his  two  other  daughters, 
marrying  them  to  the  two  highest  of  his  nobility, 
Gonorilla  to  Maglaunus,  Duke  of  Albania^  and 
Regan  to  Henuinus,  Duke  of  Cornwall.  To  Cor- 
deilla  he  not  only  refused  a  share  in  his  realm,  but 
even  a  dowry.  Aganippus,  King  of  the  Franks, 
married  her,  however,  for  her  beauty  alone. 

Once  in  possession,  Leir  s  two  sons-in-law  rebelled 
against  him,  and  deprived  him  of  all  regal  authority. 
The  sole  recompense  for  his  lost  power  was  an  agree- 
ment by  Maglaunus  to  allow  him  maintenance,  with 
a  body-guard  of  sixty  soldiers.  But,  after  two  years, 
the  Duke  of  Albania,  at  his  wife  Gonorilla's  instiga- 
tion, reduced  them  to  thirty.  Resenting  this,  Leir 
left  Maglaunus,  and  went  to  Henuinus,  the  husband 
of  Regan.  The  Duke  of  Cornwall  at  first  received 
him  honourably,  but,  before  a  year  was  out,  com- 
pelled him  to  discharge  all  his  attendants  except 
five.  This  sent  him  back  in  a  rage  to  his  eldest 
daughter,  who,  this  time,  swore  that  he  should  not 
stay  with  her,  unless  he  would  be  satisfied  with  one 
serving -man  only.  In  despair,  Leir  resolved  to 
throw  himself  upon  the  mercy  of  Cordeilla,  and,  full 

1  Alba,  or  North  Britain. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       383 

of  contrition  for  the  way  he  had  treated  her,  and  of 
misgivings  as  to  how  he  might  be  received,  took 
ship  for  Gaul. 

Arriving  at  Karitia^  he  sent  a  messenger  to  his 
daughter,  telling  her  of  his  plight  and  asking  for  her 
help.  Cordeilla  sent  him  money,  robes,  and  a  retinue 
of  forty  men,  and,  as  soon  as  he  was  fully  equipped 
with  the  state  suitable  to  a  king,  he  was  received  in 
pomp  by  Aganippus  and  his  ministers,  who  gave  the 
government  of  Gaul  into  his  hands  until  his  own 
kingdom  could  be  restored  to  him.  This  the  king 
of  the  Franks  did  by  raising  an  army  and  invading 
Britain.  Maglaunus  and  Henuinus  were  routed, 
and  Leir  replaced  on  the  throne,  after  which  he 
lived  three  years.  Cordeilla,  succeeding  to  the 
government  of  Britain,  ''buried  her  father  in  a 
certain  vault,  which  she  ordered  to  be  made  for  him 
under  the  River  Sore,  in  Leicester  (''  Llyr-cestre  "), 
and  which  had  been  built  originally  under  the  ground 
to  the  honour  of  the  god  Janus.  And  here  all  the 
workmen  of  the  city,  upon  the  anniversary  solemnity 
of  that  festival,  used  to  begin  their  yearly  labours.'* 

Exactly  what  myth  is  retold  in  this  history  of 
Leir  and  his  three  daughters  we  are  hardly  likely 
ever  to  discover.  But  its  mythological  nature  is 
clear  enough  in  the  light  of  the  description  of  the 
underground  temple  dedicated  to  Llyr,  at  once  the 
god  of  the  subaqueous,  and  therefore  subterranean, 
world  and  a  British  Dis  Pater,  connected  with  the 
origin  of  things,  like  the  Roman  god  Janus,  with 
whom  he  was  apparently  identified.* 

1  Now  Calais.  '  Rhys:  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  131-132 


384         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Ten  kings  or  so  after  this  (for  any  more  exact 
way  of  measuring  the  flight  of  time  is  absent  from 
Geoffrey's  History^  we  recognize  two  other  British 
gods  upon  the  scene.  Brennius  (that  is,  Bran) 
disputes  the  kingdom  with  his  brother  BeHnus. 
Clearly  this  is  a  version  of  the  ancient  myth  of 
the  twin  brothers,  Darkness  and  Light,  which  we 
have  seen  expressed  in  so  many  ways  in  Celtic 
mythology.  Bran,  the  god  of  death  and  the  under- 
world, is  opposed  to  Belinus,  god  of  the  sun  and 
health.  In  the  original,  lost  myth,  probably  they 
alternately  conquered  and  were  conquered — a  symbol 
of  the  alternation  of  night  and  day  and  of  winter  and 
summer.  In  Geoffrey's  History^,  they  divided  Bri- 
tain, Belinus  taking  **  the  crown  of  the  island  with 
the  dominions  of  Loegria,  Kambria,  and  Cornwall, 
because,  according  to  the  Trojan  constitution,  the 
right  of  inheritance  would  come  to  him  as  the  elder", 
while  Brennius,  as  the  younger,  had  *'  Northumber- 
land, which  extended  from  the  River  H umber  to 
Caithness".  But  flatterers  persuaded  Brennius  to 
ally  himself  with  the  King  of  the  Norwegians,  and 
attack  Belinus.  A  battle  was  fought,  in  which 
Belinus  was  conqueror,  and  Brennius  escaped  to 
Gaul,  where  he  married  the  daughter  of  the  Duke 
of  the  Allobroges,  and  on  that  ruler's  death  was 
declared  successor  to  the  throne.  Thus  firmly 
established  with  an  army,  he  invaded  Britain  again. 
Belinus  marched  with  the  whole  strength  of  the  king- 
dom to  meet  him,  and  the  armies  were  already  drawn 

*  Historia  Britonum,  Book  HI,  chaps.  i-X. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        385 

out  opposite  to  one  another  in  battle  array  when 
Conwenna,  the  mother  of  the  two  kings,  succeeded  in 
reconciling  them.  Not  having  one  another  to  fight 
with,  the  brothers  now  agreed  upon  a  joint  expedition 
with  their  armies  into  Gaul.  The  Britons  and  the 
Allobroges  conquered  all  the  other  kings  of  the 
Franks,  and  then  entered  Italy,  destroying  villages 
and  cities  as  they  marched  to  Rome.  Gabius  and 
Porsena,  the  Roman  consuls,  bought  them  off  with 
large  presents  of  gold  and  silver  and  the  promise  of 
a  yearly  tribute,  whereupon  Brennius  and  Belinus 
withdrew  their  army  into  Germany  and  began  to 
devastate  it.  But  the  Romans,  now  no  longer  taken 
by  surprise  and  unprepared,  came  to  the  help  of  the 
Germans.  This  brought  Brennius  and  Belinus  back 
to  Rome,  which,  after  a  long  siege,  they  succeeded 
in  taking.  Brennius  remained  in  Italy,  **  where  he 
exercised  unheard-of  tyranny  over  the  people";  and 
one  may  take  the  whole  of  this  veracious  history  to 
be  due  to  a  patriotic  desire  to  make  out  the  Brennus 
of  "Vae  Victis"  fame — who  actually  did  sack  Rome, 
in  B.C.  390 — a  Briton.  Belinus,  the  other  brother, 
returned  to  England.  **  He  made  a  gate  of  wonder- 
ful structure  in  Trinovantum,  upon  the  bank  of  the 
Thames,  which  the  citizens  call  after  his  name 
Billingsgate  to  this  day.  Over  it  he  built  a  pro- 
digiously large  tower,  and  under  it  a  haven  or  quay 
for  ships.  ...  At  last,  when  he  had  finished  his 
days,  his  body  was  burned,  and  the  ashes  put  up  in 
a  golden  urn,  which  they  placed  at  Trinovantum, 
with  wonderful  art,  on  the  top  of  the  tower  above 
mentioned."     He  was  succeeded  by  Gurgiunt  Brab- 

(  B  219  )  2  B 


386         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

truc,^  who,  as  he  was  returning  by  way  of  the 
Orkneys  from  a  raid  on  the  Danes,  met  the  ships  of 
Partholon  and  his  people  as  they  came  from  Spain 
to  settle  in  Ireland.^ 

Llyr  and  his  children,  large  as  they  bulk  in  mythi- 
cal history,  were  hardly  less  illustrious  as  saints. 
The  family  of  Llyr  Llediath  is  always  described  by 
the  early  Welsh  hagiologists  as  the  first  of  the 
"Three  chief  Holy  Families  of  the  Isle  of  Britain". 
The  glory  of  Llyr  himself,  however,  is  but  a  reflected 
one;  for  it  was  his  son  Bran  "the  Blessed"  who 
actually  introduced  Christianity  into  Britain.  Legend 
tells  us  that  he  was  taken  captive  to  Rome  with  his 
son  Caradawc  (who  was  identified  for  the  purpose 
with  the  historical  Caratacus),  and  the  rest  of  his 
family,  and  remained  there  seven  years,  during 
which  time  he  became  converted  to  the  Gospel,  and 
spread  it  enthusiastically  on  his  return.  Neither  his 
son  Caradawc  nor  his  half-brother  Manawyddan 
exactly  followed  in  his  footsteps,  but  their  descend- 
ants did.  Caradawc  s  sons  were  all  saintly,  while 
his  daughter  Eigen,  who  married  a  chief  called  Sarr- 
log,  lord  of  Caer  Sarrlog  (Old  Sarum),  was  the  first 
female  saint  in  Britain.  Manawyddan  s  side  of  the 
family  was  less  adaptable.  His  son  and  his  grand- 
son were  both  pagans,  but  his  great-grandson 
obtained  Christian  fame  as  St.  Dyfan,  who  was 
sent  as  a  bishop  to  Wales  by  Pope  Eleutherius, 
and  was  martyred  at  Merthyr  Dyvan.  After  this, 
the  saintly   line  of   Llyr   increases  and   flourishes. 

*  The  same  fabulous  personage,  perhaps,  as  the  original  of  Rabelais'  Gargantua 
a  popular  Celtic  god.  ^  fiistoria  Britonum,  Book  III,  Chaps,  xi-xii. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       387 

Singularly  inappropriate  persons  are  found  in  it — 
Mabon,  the  Gallo- British  Apollo,  as  well  as  Geraint 
and  others  of  King  Arthur's  court. ^ 

It  is  so  quaint  a  conceit  that  Christianity  should 
have  been,  like  all  other  things,  the  gift  of  the  Celtic 
Hades,  that  it  seems  almost  a  pity  to  cast  doubt  on 
it.  The  witness  of  the  classical  historians  sums  up, 
however,  dead  in  its  disfavour.  Tacitus  carefully 
enumerates  the  family  of  Caratacus,  and  describes 
how  he  and  his  wife,  daughter,  and  brother  were 
separately  interviewed  by  the  Emperor  Claudius, 
but  makes  no  mention  at  all  of  the  chieftain's  sup- 
posed father  Brin.  Moreover,  Dio  Cassius  gives 
the  name  of  Caratacus's  father  as  Cunobelinus — 
Shakespeare's  **Cymbeline" — who,  he  adds,  had 
died  before  the  Romans  first  invaded  Britain.  The 
evidence  is  wholly  against  Bran  as  a  Christian 
pioneer.  He  remains  the  grim  old  god  of  war  and 
death,  **  blessed"  only  to  his  pagan  votaries,  and 
especially  to  the  bards,  who  probably  first  called  him 
Bendigeid  Vran,  and  whose  stubborn  adherence 
must  have  been  the  cause  of  the  not  less  stubborn 
efforts  of  their  enemies,  the  Christian  clerics,  to 
bring  him  over  to  their  own  side  by  canonization.^ 

They  had  an  easier  task  with  Brdn  s  sister.  Bran- 
wen  of  the  "  Fair  Bosom".  Goddesses,  indeed,  seem 
to  have  stood  the  process  better  than  gods — witness 
"Saint"    Brigit,    the   "Mary  of  the   Gael".      The 

1  See  the  lolo  MSS.  The  genealogies  and  families  of  the  saints  of  the  island  of 
Britain.  Copied  by  lolo  Morganwg  in  1783  from  the  Long  Book  of  Thomas  Truman 
of  Pantlliwydd  in  the  parish  of  Llansanor  in  Glamorgan,  p,  515,  &c.  Also  see 
An  Essay  on  the  Welsh  Saints  by  the  Rev.  Rice  Rees,  Sections  IV  and  V. 

*  Rhys :  Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  261-262. 


388         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

British  Aphrodite  became,  under  the  name  of  Bryn- 
wyn,  or  Dwynwen,  a  patron  saint  of  lovers.  As 
late  as  the  fourteenth  century,  her  shrine  at  Llan- 
dwynwyn,  in  Anglesey,  was  the  favourite  resort  of 
the  disappointed  of  both  sexes,  who  came  to  pray 
to  her  image  for  either  success  or  forgetfulness.  To 
make  the  result  the  more  certain,  the  monks  of  the 
church  sold  Lethean  draughts  from  her  sacred  well. 
The  legend  told  of  her  is  that,  having  vowed  herself 
to  perpetual  celibacy,  she  fell  in  love  with  a  young 
chief  called  Maelon.  One  night,  as  she  was  praying 
for  guidance  in  her  difficulty,  she  had  a  vision  in 
which  she  was  offered  a  goblet  of  delicious  liquor  as 
a  draught  of  oblivion,  and  she  also  saw  the  same 
sweet  medicine  given  to  Maelon,  whom  it  at  once 
froze  into  a  block  of  ice.  She  was  then,  for  her 
faith,  offered  the  granting  of  three  boons.  The  first 
she  chose  was  that  Maelon  might  be  allowed  to  re- 
sume his  natural  form  and  temperature;  the  second, 
that  she  should  no  longer  desire  to  be  married;  and 
the  third,  that  her  intercessions  might  be  granted 
for  all  true-hearted  lovers,  so  that  they  should  either 
wed  the  objects  of  their  affection  or  be  cured  of 
their  passion.^  From  this  cause  came  the  virtues  of 
her  shrine  and  fountain.  But  the  modern  generation 
no  longer  flocks  there,  and  the  efficacious  well  is 
choked  with  sand.  None  the  less,  she  whom  the 
Welsh  bards  called  the  "Saint  of  Love"^  still 
has  her  occasional  votaries.     Country  girls  of  the 


^  lolo  MSS,  p.  474. 

2  "  The  Welsh  bards  call  Dwynwen  the  goddess,  or  saint  of  love  and  affection, 
as  the  poets  designate  Venus."     lolo  MSS. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       389 

neighbourhood  seek  her  help  when  all  else  fails. 
The  water  nearest  to  the  church  is  thought  to  be 
the  best  substitute  for  the  now  dry  and  ruined 
original  well.^ 

A  striking  contrast  to  this  easy  victory  over 
paganism  is  the  stubborn  resistance  to  Christian 
adoption  of  Gwyn  son  of  Nudd.  It  is  true  that  he 
was  once  enrolled  by  some  monk  in  the  train  of  the 
**  Blessed  Bran '7  but  it  was  done  in  so  half-hearted 
a  way  that,  even  now,  one  can  discern  that  the 
writer  felt  almost  ashamed  of  himself  His  fame 
as  at  least  a  powerful  fairy  was  too  vital  to  be 
thus  tampered  with.  Even  Spenser,  though,  in  his 
Faerie  Queene,  he  calls  him  **the  good  Sir  Guyon 
...  in  whom  great  rule  of  Temp'raunce  goodly  doth 
appeare  ",^  does  not  attempt  to  conceal  his  real 
nature.     It  is  no  man,  but 

"  an  Elfin  born,  of  noble  state 
And  mickle  worship  in  his  native  land  ",* 

who  sets  forth  the  beauties  of  that  virtue  for  which 
the  original  Celtic  paradise,  with  its  unfailing  ale 
and  rivers  of  mead  and  wine,  would  hardly  seem 
to  have  been  the  best  possible  school.  Save  for 
Spenser,  all  authorities  agree  in  making  Gwyn  the 
determined  opponent  of  things  Christian.  A  curious 
and  picturesque  legend  ^  is  told  of  him  in  connection 
with  St.  Collen,  who  was  himself  the  great-grandson 
of  Brin's  son,    Caradawc.     The  saint,  desirous  of 

^  Wirt  Sikes :  British  Goblins,  p.  350.  *  lolo  MSS,  p.  523. 

3  The  Faerie  Queette,  Prologue  to  Book  l\.         *  Ibid.,  Book  II,  canto  i,  verse  6. 
'Published  in   Y  Greal  (London,   1805),  and   is  to  be  found  quoted  in  Rhys: 
Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  338,  339;  also  in  Sikes:  British  Goblins,  pp.  7-8. 


390         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

still  further  retirement  from  the  world,  had  made 
himself  a  cell  beneath  a  rock  near  Glastonbury  Tor, 
in  Gwyn's  own  **  island  of  Avilion  ".  It  was  close 
to  a  road,  and  one  day  he  heard  two  men  pass  by 
talking  about  Gwyn  son  of  Nudd,  and  declaring 
him  to  be  King  of  Annwn  and  the  fairies.  St. 
Collen  put  his  head  out  of  the  cell,  and  told  them  to 
hold  their  tongues,  and  that  Gwyn  and  his  fairies 
were  only  demons.  The  two  men  retorted  by 
warning  the  saint  that  he  would  soon  have  to  meet 
the  dark  ruler  face  to  face.  They  passed  on,  and 
not  long  afterwards  St.  Collen  heard  someone 
knocking  at  his  door.  On  asking  who  was  there, 
he  got  the  answer:  **  I  am  here,  the  messenger  of 
Gwyn  ap  Nudd,  King  of  Hades,  to  bid  thee  come 
by  the  middle  of  the  day  to  speak  with  him  on  the 
top  of  the  hill"  The  saint  did  not  go;  and  the 
messenger  came  a  second  time  with  the  same  mes- 
sage. On  the  third  visit,  he  added  a  threat  that,  if 
St  Collen  did  not  come  now,  it  would  be  the  worse 
for  him.  So,  a  little  disquieted,  he  went,  but  not 
unarmed.  He  consecrated  some  water,  and  took 
it  with  him. 

On  other  days  the  top  of  Glastonbury  Tor  had 
always  been  bare,  but  on  this  occasion  the  saint 
found  it  crowned  by  a  splendid  castle.  Men  and 
maidens,  beautifully  dressed,  were  going  in  and 
out  A  page  received  him  and  told  him  that  the 
king  was  waiting  for  him  to  be  his  guest  at  dinner. 
St  Collen  found  Gwyn  sitting  on  a  golden  chair  in 
front  of  a  table  covered  with  the  rarest  dainties  and 
wines.     He  invited  him  to  share  them,  adding  that 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods       391 

if  there  was  anything  he  especially  liked,  it  should 
be  brought  to  him  with  all  honour.  "  I  do  not  eat 
the  leaves  of  trees,"  replied  the  saint,  who  knew 
what  fairy  meats  and  drinks  were  made  of  Not 
taken  aback  by  this  discourteous  answer,  the  King 
of  Annwn  genially  asked  the  saint  if  he  did  not 
admire  his  servants'  livery,  which  was  a  motley 
costume,  red  on  one  side  and  blue  on  the  other. 
**  Their  dress  is  good  enough  for  its  kind,"  said  St. 
Collen.  ''What  kind  is  that?"  asked  Gwyn.  **The 
red  shows  which  side  is  being  scorched,  and  the 
blue  shows  which  side  is  being  frozen,"  replied  the 
saint,  and,  splashing  his  holy  water  all  round  him, 
he  saw  castle,  serving-men,  and  king  vanish,  leaving 
him  alone  on  the  bare,  windy  hill-top. 

Gwyn,  last  of  the  gods  of  Annwn,  has  evidently  by 
this  time  taken  over  the  functions  of  all  the  others. 
He  has  the  hounds  which  Arawn  once  had — the 
Cwn  Annwn,  "dogs  of  hell",  with  the  white  bodies 
and  the  red  ears.  We  hear  more  of  them  in  folk- 
lore than  we  do  of  their  master,  though  even  their 
tradition  is  dying  out  with  the  spread  of  newspapers 
and  railways.  We  are  not  likely  to  find  another 
Reverend  Edmund  Jones  ^  to  insist  upon  belief  in 
them,  lest,  by  closing  our  minds  to  such  manifest 
witnesses  of  the  supernatural  world,  we  should 
become  infidels.  Still,  we  may  even  now  find 
peasants  ready  to  swear  that  they  have  heard  them 
sweeping  along  the  hill-sides  upon  stormy  nights,  as 
they  pursued  the  flying  souls  of  unshriven  men  or 

1  A  Relation  of  Apparitions  of  Spirits  in  the  County  of  Monmouth  and  the  Prin- 
cipality of  Wales.     Published  at  Newport,  1813. 


392         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

unbaptized  babes.  The  tales  told  of  them  agree 
curiously.  Their  cry  is  like  that  of  a  pack  of  fox- 
hounds, but  softer  in  tone.  The  nearer  they  are  to 
a  man,  the  less  loud  their  voices  seem,  and  the 
farther  off  they  are,  the  louder.  But  they  are  less 
often  seen  than  heard,  and  it  has  been  suggested 
that  the  sounds  were  the  cries  of  migrating  bean- 
geese,  which  are  not  unlike  those  of  hounds  in 
chase.  The  superstition  is  widely  spread.  The 
Cwn  Annwn  of  Wales  are  called  in  North  Devon 
the  *'Yeth"  (Heath  or  Heathen),  or  ''Yell" 
Hounds,  and  on  Dartmoor,  the  *'Wish"  Hounds. 
In  Durham  and  Yorkshire  they  are  called  ** Gabriel" 
Hounds,  and  they  are  known  by  various  names  in 
Norfolk,  Gloucestershire,  and  Cornwall.  In  Scot- 
land it  is  Arthur  who  leads  the  Wild  Hunt,  and  the 
tradition  is  found  over  almost  the  whole  of  western 
Europe. 

Not  many  folk  -  tales  have  been  preserved  in 
which  Gwyn  is  mentioned  by  name.  His  memory 
has  lingered  longest  and  latest  in  the  fairy-haunted 
Vale  of  Neath,  so  close  to  his  '*  ridge,  the  Tawe  abode 
.  .  .  not  the  nearest  Tawe  .  .  .  but  that  Tawe  which 
is  the  farthest".  But  it  may  be  understood  when- 
ever the  king  of  the  fairies  is  mentioned.  As  the 
last  of  the  greater  gods  of  the  old  mythology,  he 
has  been  endowed  by  popular  fancy  with  the  rule  of 
all  the  varied  fairy  population  of  Britain,  so  far,  at 
least,  as  it  is  of  Celtic  or  pre-Celtic  origin.  For 
some  of  the  fairies  most  famous  in  English  literature 
are  Teutonic.  King  Oberon  derives  his  name, 
through    the    French  fabliaux^  from    Elberich,   the 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        393 

dwarf  king  of  the  Niebehtngenlied^  though  his 
queen,  Titania,  was  probably  named  out  of  Ovid's 
Metamorphoses}  Puck,  another  of  Shakespeare's 
fays,  is  merely  the  personification  of  his  race,  the 
"pwccas"  of  Wales,  **  pookas"  of  Ireland,  *'poakes" 
of  Worcestershire,  and  *' pixies"  of  the  West  of 
England.^  It  is  Wales  that  at  the  present  time 
preserves  the  most  numerous  and  diverse  collection 
of  fairies.  Some  of  them  are  beautiful,  some  hid- 
eous; some  kindly,  some  malevolent.  There  are 
the  gentle  damsels  of  the  lakes  and  streams  called 
Gwragedd  Annwn,  and  the  fierce  and  cruel  moun- 
tain fairies  known  as  the  Gwyllion.  There  are  the 
household  sprites  called  Bwbachod,  like  the  Scotch 
and  English  **  brownies";  the  Coblynau,  or  gnomes 
of  the  mines  (called  **  knockers"  in  Cornwall);  and 
the  Ellyllon,  or  elves,  of  whom  the  pwccas  are  a 
branch.*  In  the  North  of  England  the  spirits 
belong  more  wholly  to  the  lower  type.  The  bogles, 
brownies,  killmoulis,  redcaps,  and  their  like  seem 
little  akin  to  the  higher,  Aryan -seeming  fairies. 
The  Welsh  bwbach,  too,  is  described  as  brown  and 
hairy,  and  the  coblynau  as  black  pr  copper-faced. 
We  shall  hardly  do  wrong  in  regarding  such 
spectres  as  the  degraded  gods  of  a  pre-Aryan  race, 
like  the  Irish  leprechauns  and  pookas,  who  have 
nothing  in  common  with  the  still  beautiful,  still 
noble  figures  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann. 

Of  these  numberless   and   nameless   subjects   of 
Gwyn,  some  dwell  beneath  the  earth  or  under  the 

1  Thistleton  Dyer :  Folklore  of  Skakespeare,  p.  3.  *  Ibid. ,  p.  4. 

*Ibid.,  p.  ^.  *Wirt  Sikes:  British  Goblins,  p.  12. 


394         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

surface  of  lakes — which  seem  to  take,  in  Wales,  the 
place  of  the  Gaelic  ** fairy  hills" — and  others  in 
Avilion,  a  mysterious  western  isle  of  all  delights 
lying  on  or  just  beneath  the  sea.  Pembrokeshire — 
the  ancient  Dyfed — has  kept  the  tradition  most 
completely.  The  story  goes  that  there  is  a  certain 
square  yard  in  the  hundred  of  Cemmes  in  that  county 
which  holds  the  secret  of  the  fairy  realm.  If  a  man 
happens  to  set  his  feet  on  it  by  chance,  his  eyes  are 
opened,  and  he  can  see  that  which  is  hidden  from 
other  men — the  fairy  country  and  commonwealth, — 
but,  the  moment  he  moves  from  the  enchanted  spot, 
he  loses  the  vision,  and  he  can  never  find  the  same 
place  again. ^  That  country  is  upon  the  sea,  and 
not  far  from  shore;  like  the  Irish  paradise  of  which 
it  is  the  counterpart,  it  may  sometimes  be  sighted 
by  sailors.  The  **  Green  Meadows  of  Enchant- 
ment "  are  still  an  article  of  faith  among  Pembroke- 
shire and  Caermarthenshire  sailors,  and  evidently 
not  without  some  reason.  In  1896  a  correspondent 
of  the  Pembroke  County  Guardian  sent  in  a  report 
made  to  him  by  a  certain  Captain  John  Evans  to 
the  effect  that,  one  summer  morning,  while  trending 
up  the  Channel,  and  passing  Gresholm  Island  (the 
scene  of  the  entertaining  of  Bran's  head),  in  what 
he  had  always  known  as  deep  water,  he  was  sur- 
prised to  see  to  windward  of  him  a  large  tract  of 
land  covered  with  a  beautiful  green  meadow.  It 
was  not,  however,  above  water,  but  two  or  three 
feet  below  it,  so  that  the  grass  waved  or  swam  about 
as  the  ripple  floated  over  it,  in  a  way  that  made  one 

1  The  Brython,  Vol.  I,  p.  130. 


The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Gods        395 

who  watched  it  feel  drowsy.  Captain  Evans  had 
often  heard  of  the  tradition  of  the  fairy  island  from 
old  people,  but  admitted  tnat  he  had  never  hoped  to 
see  it  with  his  own  eyes.^  As  with  the  **  Hounds  of 
Annwn  "  one  may  suspect  a  quite  natural  explana- 
tion. Mirage  is  at  once  common  enough  and  rare 
enough  on  our  coasts  to  give  rise  to  such  a  legend, 
and  it  must  have  been  some  such  phenomenon  as 
the  ''Fata  Morgana"  of  Sicily  which  has  made 
sober  men  swear  so  confidently  to  ocular  evidence  of 
the  Celtic  Paradise,  whether  seen  from  the  farthest 
western  coasts  of  Gaelic  Ireland  or  Scotland,  or  of 
British  Wales. 

^  Rhys :  Celtic  Folklore,  po.  171-  17a. 


SURVIVALS  OF  THE  CELTIC 
PAGANISM 


CHAPTER   XXV 

SURVIVALS    OF    THE    CELTIC    PAGANISM    INTO    MODERN 

TIMES 

The  fall  of  the  Celtic  state  worship  began  earlier 
in  Britain  than  in  her  sister  island.  Neither  was  it 
Christianity  that  struck  the  first  blow,  but  the  rough 
humanity  and  stern  justice  of  the  Romans.  Thai 
people  was  more  tolerant,  perhaps,  than  any  the 
world  has  ever  known  towards  the  religions  of 
others,  and  gladly  welcomed  the  Celtic  gods — as 
gods — into  its  own  diverse  Pantheon.  A  friendly 
Gaulish  or  British  divinity  might  at  any  time  be 
granted  the  so-to-speak  divine  Roman  citizenship, 
and  be  assimilated  to  Jupiter,  to  Mars,  to  Apollo,  or 
to  any  other  properly  accredited  deity  whom  the 
Romans  deemed  him  to  resemble.  It  was  not 
against  the  god,  but  against  his  worship  at  the  hands 
of  his  priests,  that  Roman  law  struck.  The  colossal 
human  sacrifices  of  the  druids  horrified  even  a 
people  who  were  far  from  squeamish  about  a  little 
bloodshed.  They  themselves  had  abolished  such 
practices  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  before  Caesar 
first  invaded  Britain,^  and  could  not  therefore  permit 
within  their  empire  a  cult  which  slaughtered  men 
in  order  to  draw  omens  from  their  death-agonies.* 
Druidism   was  first   required  to   be  renounced  by 

1  In  the  year  55  B.C.  "^  Strabo.  Book  IV,  chap.  iv. 

399 


400         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

those  who  claimed  Roman  citizenship;  then  it  was 
vigorously  put  down  among  the  less  civilized  tribes. 
Tacitus  tells  us  how  the  Island  of  Mona  (Anglesey) 
— the  great  stronghold  of  druidism — was  attacked, 
its  sacred  groves  cut  down,  its  altars  laid  level,  and 
its  priests  put  to  the  sword. ^  Pliny,  recording  how 
the  Emperor  Tiberius  had  "suppressed  the  druids", 
congratulates  his  fellow-countrymen  on  having  put 
an  end,  wherever  their  dominion  extended,  to  the 
monstrous  customs  inspired  by  the  doctrine  that  the* 
gods  could  take  pleasure  in  murder  and  cannibalism.^ 
The  practice  of  druidism,  with  its  attendant  barbari- 
ties, abolished  in  Britain  wherever  the  long  Roman 
arm  could  reach  to  strike,  took  refuge  beyond  the 
Northern  Wall,  among  the  savage  Caledonian 
tribes  who  had  not  yet  submitted  to  the  invader  s 
yoke.  Naturally,  too,  it  remained  untouched  in 
Ireland.  But  before  the  Romans  left  Britain,  it  had 
been  extirpated  everywhere,  except  among  "  the 
Picts  and  Scots ". 

Christianity,  following  the  Roman  rule,  completed 
the  ruin  of  paganism  in  Britain,  so  far,  at  least,  as 
its  public  manifestations  were  concerned.  In  the 
sixth  century  of  our  era,  the  monkish  writer,  Gildas, 
is  able  to  refer  complacently  to  the  ancient  British 
religion  as  a  dead  faith.  "  I  shall  not ",  he  says, 
**  enumerate  those  diabolical  idols  of  my  country, 
which  almost  surpassed  in  number  those  of  Egypt, 
and  of  which  we  still  see  some  mouldering  away 
within  or  without  the  deserted  temples,  with  stiff 
and  deformed  features  as  was  customary.     Nor  will 

1  Annals,  Book  XIV,  chap.  xxx.  '  Natural  History,  Book  XXX. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  401 

I  cry  out  upon  the  mountains,  fountains,  or  hills,  or 
upon  the  rivers,  which  now  are  subservient  to  the 
use  of  men,  but  once  were  an  abomination  and 
destruction  to  them,  and  to  which  the  blind  people 
paid  divine  honour."^  And  with  the  idols  fell  the 
priests.  The  very  word  **  druid  "  became  obsolete, 
and  is  scarcely  mentioned  in  the  earliest  British 
literature,  though  druids  are  prominent  characters 
in  the  Irish  writings  of  the  same  period. 

The  secular  arm  had  no  power  in  Scotland  and 
in  Ireland,  consequently  the  battle  between  Paganism 
and  Christianity  was  fought  upon  more  equal  terms, 
and  lasted  longer.  In  the  first  country,  Saint  Col- 
umba,  and  in  the  second,  Saint  Patrick  are  the 
personages  who,  at  any  rate  according  to  tradition, 
beat  down  the  druids  and  their  gods.  Adamnan, 
Abbot  of  lona,  who  wrote  his  Vita  ColumbcB  in  the 
last  decade  of  the  seventh  century,  describes  how, 
a  century  earlier,  that  saint  had  carried  the  Gospel 
to  the  Picts.  Their  king,  Brude,  received  him  con- 
temptuously, and  the  royal  druids  left  no  heathen 
spell  unuttered  to  thwart  and  annoy  him.  But,  as 
the  power  of  Moses  was  greater  than  the  power  of 
the  magicians  of  Egypt,  so  Saint  Columba  s  prayers 
caused  miracles  more  wonderful  and  more  convinc- 
ing than  any  wrought  by  his  adversaries.  Such 
stories  belong  to  the  atmosphere  of  myth  which  has 
always  enveloped  heroic  men;  the  essential  fact  is 
that  the  Picts  abandoned  the  old  religion  for  the 
new. 

A  similar  legend  sums  up  the  life-work  of  Saint 

^  Gildas.     See  Six  Old  English  Chronicles — Bohn's  Libraries. 
( B  210 )  2  C 


402         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

Patrick  in  Ireland.  Before  he  came,  Cromm 
Cruaich  had  received  from  time  immemorial  his 
yearly  toll  of  human  lives.  But  Saint  Patrick  faced 
the  gruesome  idol;  as  he  raised  his  crozier,  we  are 
told,  the  demon  fell  shrieking  from  his  image,  which, 
deprived  of  its  soul,  bowed  forward  to  the  ground. 

It  is  far  easier,  however,  to  overthrow  the  more 
public  manifestations  of  a  creed  than  to  destroy  its 
inner  vital  force.  Cromm  Cruaich  s  idol  might  fall, 
but  his  spirit  would  survive — a  very  Proteus.  The 
sacred  places  of  the  ancient  Celtic  religion  might  be 
invaded,  the  idols  and  altars  of  the  gods  thrown 
down,  the  priests  slain,  scattered,  or  banished,  and 
the  cult  officially  declared  to  be  extinct ;  but, 
driven  from  the  important  centres,  it  would  yet 
survive  outside  and  around  them.  The  more  civil- 
ized Gaels  and  Britons  would  no  doubt  accept  the 
purer  gospel,  and  abandon  the  gods  they  had  once 
adored,  but  the  peasantry — the  bulk  of  the  popula- 
tion— would  still  cling  to  the  familiar  rites  and 
names.  A  nobler  belief  and  a  higher  civilization 
come,  after  all,  only  as  surface  waves  upon  the  great 
ocean  of  human  life;  beneath  their  agitations  lies  a 
vast  slumbering  abyss  of  half-conscious  faith  and 
thought  to  which  culture  penetrates  with  difficulty 
and  in  which  changes  come  very  slowly. 

We  have  already  shown  how  long  and  how  faith- 
fully the  Gaelic  and  Welsh  peasants  clung  to  their 
old  gods,  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  clerics  to 
explain  them  as  ancient  kings,  to  transform  them 
into  wonder-working  saints,  or  to  ban  them  as 
demons  of  hell.     This  conservative  religious  instinct 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  403 

of  the  agricultural  populations  is  not  confined  to  the 
inhabitants  of  the  British  Islands.  The  modern 
Greeks  still  believe  in  nereids,  in  lamias,  in  sirens, 
and  in  Charon,  the  dark  ferryman  of  Hades. -^  The 
descendants  of  the  Romans  and  Etruscans  hold  that 
the  old  Etruscan  gods  and  the  Roman  deities  of  the 
woods  and  fields  still  live  in  the  world  as  spirits.^ 
The  high  altars  of  the  ''Lord  of  the  Mound"  and 
his  terrible  kin  were  levelled,  and  their  golden 
images  and  great  temples  left  to  moulder  in  abandon- 
ment; but  the  rude  rustic  shrine  to  the  rude  rustic 
god  still  received  its  offerings.  It  is  this  shifting 
of  the  care  of  the  pagan  cult  from  chief  to  peasant, 
from  court  to  hovel,  and,  perhaps,  to  some  extent 
from  higher  to  lower  race,  that  serves  to  explain 
how  the  more  primitive  and  uncouth  gods  have 
tended  so  largely  to  supplant  those  of  higher,  more 
graceful  mien.  Aboriginal  deities,  thrust  into 
obscurity  by  the  invasion  of  higher  foreign  types, 
came  back  to  their  own  again. 

For  it  seems  plain  that  we  must  divide  the 
spiritual  population  of  the  British  Islands  into  two 
classes.  There  is  little  in  common  between  the 
*'  fairy  ",  strictly  so-called,  and  the  unsightly  elf  who 
appears  under  various  names  and  guises,  as  pooka, 
leprechaun,  brownie,  knocker,  or  bogle.  The  one 
belongs  to  such  divine  tribes  as  the  Tuatha  D^ 
Danann  of  Gaelic  myth  or  their  kin,  the  British 
gods  of  the  Mabinogion.    The  other  owes  his  origin 


^  Rennell  Rodd :  Customs  and  Lore  of  Modern  Greece.     Stuart  Glennie :  Greek 
Folk  Songs. 
'  Charles  Godfrey  Leland:  Etruscan  Roman  Remains  in  Popular  Tradition. 


404         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

to  a  quite  different,  and  much  lower,  kind  of  imagina- 
tion. One  might  fancy  that  neolithic  man  made  him 
in  his  own  image. 

None  the  less  has  immemorial  tradition  wonder- 
fully preserved  the  essential  features  of  the  Celtic 
nature-gods.  The  fairy  belief  of  the  present  day 
hardly  differs  at  all  from  the  conception  which  the 
Celts  had  of  their  deities.  The  description  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  in  the  **  Dialogue  of  the  Elders" 
as  "sprites  or  fairies  with  corporeal  or  material 
forms  but  indued  with  immortality  "  would  stand  as 
an  account  of  prevailing  ideas  as  to  the  **good 
people"  to-day.  Nor  do  the  Irish  and  Welsh 
fairies  of  popular  belief  differ  from  one  another. 
Both  alike  live  among  the  hills,  though  in  Wales 
a  lake  often  takes  the  place  of  the  ''fairy  mound"; 
both,  though  they  war  and  marry  among  them- 
selves, are  semi-immortal;  both  covet  the  children 
of  men,  and  will  steal  them  from  the  cradle,  leaving 
one  of  their  own  uncanny  brood  in  the  mortal  baby's 
stead;  both  can  lay  men  and  women  under  spells; 
both  delight  in  music  and  the  dance,  and  live  lives 
of  unreal  and  fantastic  splendour  and  luxury. 
Another  point  in  which  they  resemble  one  another 
is  in  their  tiny  size.  But  this  would  seem  to  be  the 
result  of  the  literary  convention  originated  by  Shake- 
speare ;  in  genuine  folktales,  both  Gaelic  and  British, 
the  fairies  are  pictured  as  of  at  least  mortal  stature.^ 

But,  Aryan  or  Iberian,  beautiful  or  hideous,  they 


1  Rhys :  Celtic  Folklore,  p.  670 ;  Curtin :  Tales  of  the  Fairies  and  of  the  Ghost 
World;  and  Mr.  Leland  Duncan's  Fairy  Belief s from  County  Leitrim  in  Folklore, 
[line,  1896. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  405 

are  fast  vanishing  from  belief  Every  year,  the 
secluded  valleys  in  which  men  and  women  might 
still  live  in  the  old  way,  and  dream  the  old  dreams, 
tend  more  and  more  to  be  thrown  open  to  the 
modern  world  of  rapid  movement  and  rapid  thought. 
The  last  ten  years  have  perhaps  done  more  in  this 
direction  than  the  preceding  ten  generations.  What 
lone  shepherd  or  fisherman  will  ever  see  again  the 
vision  of  the  great  Mananndn?  Have  the  stable- 
boys  of  to-day  still  any  faith  left  in  Finvarra?  Is 
Gwyn  ap  Nudd  often  thought  of  in  his  own  valleys 
of  the  Tawe  and  the  Nedd?  It  would  be  hard, 
perhaps,  to  find  a  whole-hearted  believer  even  in 
his  local  pooka  or  parish  bogle. 

It  is  the  ritual  observances  of  the  old  Celtic  faith 
which  have  better  weathered,  and  will  longer  survive, 
the  disintegrating  influences  of  time.  There  are  no 
hard  names  to  be  remembered.  Things  may  still 
be  done  for  '^  luck  "  which  were  once  done  for  re- 
ligion. Customary  observances  die  very  slowly, 
held  up  by  an  only  half  acknowledged  fear  that, 
unless  they  are  fulfilled,  "  something  may  happen  ". 
We  shall  get,  therefore,  more  satisfactory  evidence 
of  the  nature  of  the  Celtic  paganism  by  examining 
5uch  customs  than  in  any  other  way. 

We  find  three  forms  of  the  survival  of  the  ancient 
religion  into  quite  recent  times.  The  first  is  the 
celebration  of  the  old  solar  or  agricultural  festivals 
of  the  spring  and  autumn  equinoxes  and  of  the 
summer  and  winter  solstices.  The  second  is  the 
practice  of  a  symbolic  human  sacrifice  by  those  who 
have  forgotten  its  meaning,  and  only  know  that  they 


4o6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

are  keeping  up  an  old  custom,  joined  with  late  in- 
stances of  the  actual  sacrifices  of  animals  to  avert 
cattle-plagues  or  to  change  bad  luck.  The  third 
consists  of  many  still  -  living  relics  of  the  once 
universal  worship  of  sacred  waters,  trees,  stones, 
and  animals. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  Celtic  state  worship,  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
that  it  centred  around  the  four  great  days  in  the 
year  which  chronicle  the  rise,  progress,  and  decline 
of  the  sun,  and,  therefore,  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth. 
These  were:  Beltaine,  which  fell  at  the  beginning 
of  May;  Midsummer  Day,  marking  the  triumph  of 
sunshine  and  vegetation;  the  Feast  of  Lugh,  when, 
in  August,  the  turning-point  of  the  sun's  course  had 
been  reached;  and  the  sad  Samhain,  when  he  bade 
farewell  to  power,  and  fell  again  for  half  a  year 
under  the  sway  of  the  evil  forces  of  winter  and 
darkness. 

Of  these  great  solar  periods,  the  first  and  the 
last  were,  naturally,  the  most  important.  The 
whole  Celtic  mythology  seems  to  revolve  upon 
them,  as  upon  pivots.  It  was  on  the  day  of  Beltaine 
that  Partholon  and  his  people,  the  discoverers,  and, 
indeed,  the  makers  of  Ireland,  arrived  there  from 
the  other  world,  and  it  was  on  the  same  day,  three 
hundred  years  later,  that  they  returned  whence  they 
came.  It  was  on  Beltaine-day  that  the  Gaelic  gods, 
the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,  and,  after  them,  the  Gaelic 
men,  first  set  foot  on  Irish  soil.  It  was  on  the  day 
of  Samhain  that  the  Fomors  oppressed  the  people 
of  Nemed  with  their  terrible  tax;  and  it  was  again 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  407 

at  Samhain  that  a  later  race  of  gods  of  light  and 
life  finally  conquered  those  demons  at  the  Battle 
of  Moytura.  Only  one  important  mythological 
incident — and  that  was  one  added  at  a  later  time! 
— happened  upon  any  other  than  one  of  those  two 
days;  it  was  upon  Midsummer  Day,  one  of  the 
lesser  solar  points,  that  the  people  of  the  goddess 
Danu  took  Ireland  from  its  inhabitants,  the  Fir 
Bolgs. 

The  mythology  of  Britain  preserves  the  same 
root-idea  as  that  of  Ireland.  If  anything  uncanny 
took  place,  it  was  sure  to  be  on  May-day.  It  was 
on  **the  night  of  the  first  of  May"  that  Rhiannon 
lost,  and  Teirnyon  Twryf  Vliant  found,  the  infant 
Pryderi,  as  told  in  the  first  of  the  Mabinogion.^  It 
was  **  on  every  May-eve "  that  the  two  dragons 
fought  and  shrieked  in  the  reign  of  *'  King"  Lludd.^ 
It  is  on  "  every  first  of  May  "  till  the  day  of  doom 
that  Gwyn  son  of  Nudd,  fights  with  Gwyrthur  son 
of  Greidawl,  for  Lludd's  fair  daughter,  Creudylad.^-^ 
And  it  was  when  she  was  **a-maying"  in  the  we/ods 
and  fields  near  Westminster  that  the  same  Gwyn, 
or  Melwas,  under  his  romance-name  of  Sir  Melia- 
graunce,  captured  Arthur's  queen,  Guinevere.* 

The  nature  of  the  rites  performed  upon  these 
days  can  be  surmised  from  their  pale  survivals. 
They  are  still  celebrated  by  the  descendants  of  the 
Celts,  though  it  is  probable  that  few  of  them  know 
— or  would  even  care  to  know — why  May  Day, 
St.  John's  Day,  Lammas,  and  Hallowe'en  are  times 

1  The  Mabinogi  of  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed.      ^  The  story  of  Lludd  and  Llevelys. 
*  Kulhwch  and  Olwen.  *  Morte  Darthur,  Book  XIX,  chaps,  i  and  il. 


4o8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

of  ceremony.  The  first — called  '*  Beltaine  "  in  Ire- 
land, ''Bealtiunn"  in  Scotland,  **Shenn  da  Boaldyn" 
in  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  '*  Galan-Mai "  (the  Calends 
of  May)  in  Wales — celebrates  the  waking  of  the 
earth  from  her  winter  sleep,  and  the  renewal  of 
warmth,  life,  and  vegetation.  This  is  the  meaning 
of  the  May-pole,  now  rarely  seen  in  our  streets, 
though  Shakespeare  tells  us  that  in  his  time  the 
festival  was  so  eagerly  anticipated  that  no  one  could 
sleep  upon  its  eve.^  At  midnight  the  people  rose, 
and,  going  to  the  nearest  woods,  tore  down  branches 
of  trees,  with  which  the  sun,  when  he  rose,  would 
find  doors  and  windows  decked  for  him.  They 
spent  the  day  in  dancing  round  the  May-pole,  with 
rude,  rustic  mirth,  man  joining  with  nature  to  cele- 
brate the  coming  of  summer.  The  opposite  to  it 
was  the  day  called  ''  Samhain  "  in  Ireland  and  Scot- 
land, **Sauin"  in  Man,  and  **  Nos  Galan-gaeof" 
(the  Night  of  the  Winter  Calends)  in  Wales.  This 
festival  was  a  sad  one:  summer  was  over,  and 
winter,  with  its  short,  sunless  days  and  long,  dreary 
nights,  was  at  hand.  It  was  the  beginning,  too,  of 
the  ancient  Celtic  year,^  and  omens  for  the  future 
might  be  extorted  from  dark  powers  by  uncanny 
rites.  It  was  the  holiday  of  the  dead  and  of  all  the 
more  evil  supernatural  beings.  "  On  November- 
eve*',  says  a  North  Cardiganshire  proverb,  **  there 
is  a  bogy  on  every  stile."  The  Scotch  have  even 
invented  a  special  bogy — the  Samhanach  or  goblin 
which  comes  out  at  Samhain.^ 

1  Henry  VIII,  act  v,  scene  3.  '  Rhys :  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  514. 

*  Ibid. ,  p.  516. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  409 

The  sun-god  himself  is  said  to  have  instituted  the 
August  festival  called  *'Lugnassad"  (Lugh's  com- 
memoration) in  Ireland,  ''  Lla  Lluanys "  in  Man, 
and  '*Gwyl  Awst"  (August  Feast)  in  Wales;  and 
it  was  once  of  hardly  less  importance  than  Beltaine 
or  Samhain.  It  is  noteworthy,  too,  that  the  first  of 
August  was  a  great  day  at  Lyons — formerly  called 
Lugudunum,  the  diln  (town)  of  Lugus.  The  mid- 
summer festival,  on  the  other  hand,  has  largely 
merged  its  mythological  significance  in  the  Christian 
Feast  of  St.  John. 

The  characteristic  features  of  these  festivals  give 
certain  proof  of  the  original  nature  of  the  great 
pagan  ceremonials  of  which  they  are  the  survivals 
and  travesties.^  In  all  of  them,  bonfires  are  lighted 
on  the  highest  hills,  and  the  hearth  fires  solemnly 
rekindled.  They  form  the  excuse  for  much  sport 
and  jollity.  But  there  is  yet  something  sinister  in 
the  air;  the  ** fairies"  are  active  and  abroad,  and 
one  must  be  careful  to  omit  no  prescribed  rite,  if 
one  would  avoid  kindling  their  anger  or  falling  into 
their  power.  To  some  of  these  still-half-believed-in 
nature-gods  offerings  were  made  down  to  a  com- 
paratively late  period.  When  Pennant  wrote,  in 
the  eighteenth  century,  it  was  the  custom  on  Bel- 
taine-day  in  many  Highland  villages  to  offer  libations 
and  cakes  not  only  to  the  ''spirits"  who  were  be- 
lieved to  be  beneficial  to  the  flocks  and  herds,  but 
also  to  creatures  like  the  fox,  the  eagle,  and  the 


^  A  good  account  of  the  Irish  festivals  is  given  by  Lady  Wilde  in  her  Ancient 
Legends  of  Ireland,  pp.  x93-sai. 


4IO         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

hoodie-crow  which  so  often  molested  them.^  At 
Hallowe'en  (the  Celtic  Samhain)  the  natives  of  the 
Hebrides  used  to  pour  libations  of  ale  to  a  marine 
god  called  Shony,  imploring  him  to  send  sea-weed 
to  the  shore.^  In  honour,  also,  of  such  beings, 
curious  rites  were  performed.  Maidens  washed 
their  faces  in  morning  dew,  with  prayers  for  beauty. 
They  carried  sprigs  of  the  rowan,  that  mystic  tree 
whose  scarlet  berries  were  the  ambrosial  food  of  the 
,  Tuatha  D6  Danann. 

In  their  original  form,  these  now  harmless  rural 
'  holidays  were  undoubtedly  religious  festivals  of  an 
orgiastic  nature- worship  such  as  became  so  popular 
in  Greece  in  connection  with  the  cult  of  Dionysus. 
The  great  "  lords  of  life"  and  of  the  powers  of  nature 
that  made  and  ruled  life  were  propitiated  by  madden- 
ing invocations,  by  riotous  dances,  and  by  human 
sacrifice. 

The  bonfires  which  fill  so  large  a  part  in  the 
modern  festivals  have  been  casually  mentioned. 
Originally  they  were  no  mere  feux  de  joie,  but  had 
a  terrible  meaning,  which  the  customs  connected 
with  them  preserve.  At  the  Highland  Beltaine, 
a  cake  was  divided  by  lot,  and  whoever  drew  the 
**  burnt  piece"  was  obliged  to  leap  three  times  over 
the  flames.  At  the  midsummer  bonfires  in  Ireland 
all  passed  through  the  fire ;  the  men  when  the  flames 
were  highest,  the  women  when  they  were  lower, 
and  the  cattle  when  there  was  nothing  left  but 
smoke.      In  Wales,  upon  the  last  day  of  October, 

'  Pennant :  A  Tour  in  Scotland  and  Voyage  to  the  Hebrides,  1772. 
^  Martin:  Description  of  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,  1695. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  411 

the  old  Samhain,  there  was  a  sHghtly  different,  and 
still  more  suggestive  rite.  The  hill-top  bonfires  were 
watched  until  they  were  announced  to  be  extinct. 
Then  all  would  race  headlong  down  the  hill,  shouting 
a  formula  to  the  effect  that  the  devil  would  get  the 
hindmost.  The  devil  of  a  new  belief  is  the  god  of 
the  one  it  has  supplanted ;  in  all  three  instances,  the 
custom  was  no  mere  meaningless  horse -play,  but  a 
symbolical  human  sacrifice. 

A  similar  observance,  but  of  a  more  cruel  kind, 
was  kept  up  in  France  upon  St.  John's  Day,  until 
forbidden  by  law  in  the  reign  of  Louis  the  Four- 
teenth. Baskets  containing  living  wolves,  foxes, 
and  cats  were  burned  upon  the  bonfires,  under  the 
auspices  and  in  the  presence  of  the  sheriffs  or  the 
mayor  of  the  town.^  Caesar  noted  the  custom 
among  the  druids  of  constructing  huge  wicker-work 
images,  which  they  filled  with  living  men,  and  set 
on  fire,  and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the 
Wretched  wolves,  foxes,  and  cats  were  ceremonial 
substitutes  for  human  beings. 

An  ingenious  theory  was  invented,  after  the  intro- 
duction of  Christianity,  with  the  purpose  of  allowing 
such  ancient  rites  to  continue,  with  a  changed  mean- 
ing. The  passing  of  persons  and  cattle  through 
flame  or  smoke  was  explained  as  a  practice  which 
interposed  a  magic  protection  between  them  and  the 
powers  of  evil.  This  homoeopathic  device  of  using 
the  evil  power  s  own  sacred  fire  as  a  means  of  pro- 
tection against  himself  somewhat  suggests  that  seeth- 
ing of  the  kid  in  its  mother  s  milk  which  was  repro- 

1  Gaidoz:  Esquisse  de  la  Riligion  des  Gaulois,  p.  21. 


412         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

bated  by  the  Levitical  law;  but,  no  doubt,  pagan 
**  demons"  were  considered  fair  game.  The  explana- 
tion, of  course,  is  an  obviously  and  clumsily  forced 
one;  it  was  the  grim  druidical  philosophy  that — to 
quote  Caesar — ''unless  the  life  of  man  was  repaid 
for  the  life  of  man,  the  will  of  the  immortal  gods 
could  not  be  appeased"  that  dictated  both  the 
national  and  the  private  human  sacrifices  of  the 
Celts,  the  shadows  of  which  remain  in  the  leaping 
through  the  bonfires,  and  in  the  numerous  recorded 
sacrifices  of  cattle  within  quite  recent  times. 

Mr.  Laurence  Gomme,  in  his  Ethnology  in  Folk- 
lore, has  collected  many  modern  instances  of  the 
sacrifices  of  cattle  not  only  in  Ireland  and  Scotland, 
but  also  in  Wales,  Yorkshire,  Northamptonshire, 
Cornwall,  and  the  Isle  of  Man.^  **  Within  twenty  miles 
of  the  metropolis  of  Scotland  a  relative  of  Professor 
Simpson  offered  up  a  live  cow  as  a  sacrifice  to  the 
spirit  of  the  murrain."^  In  Wales,  when  cattle- 
sickness  broke  out,  a  bullock  was  immolated  by 
being  thrown  down  from  the  top  of  a  high  rock. 
Generally,  however,  the  wretched  victims  were 
burned  alive.  In  1859  an  Isle  of  Man  farmer 
offered  a  heifer  as  a  burnt  offering  near  Tynwald 
Hill,  to  avert  the  anger  of  the  ghostly  occupant  of 
a  barrow  which  had  been  desecrated  by  opening. 
Sometimes,  even,  these  burnt  oblations  were  offered 
to  an  alleged  Christian  saint.  The  registers  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Dingwall  for  the  years  1656  and  1678 
contain  records  of  the  sacrifices  of  cattle  upon  the 

1  Gomme :  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  pp.  136-139. 

2  Ibid. ,  p.  137. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  413 

site  of  an  ancient  temple  in  honour  of  a  being  whom 
some  called  *'  St.  Mourie",  and  others,  perhaps  know- 
ing his  doubtful  character,  "ane  god  Mourie"/  At 
Kirkcudbright,  it  was  St.  Cuthbert,  and  at  Clynnog, 
in  Wales,  it  was  St.  Beuno,  who  was  thought  to 
delight  in  the  blood  of  bulls.  ^ 

Such  sacrifices  of  cattle  appear  mainly  to  have 
been  offered  to  stay  plague  among  cattle.  Man  for 
man  and  beast  for  beast,  was,  perhaps,  the  old  rule. 
But  among  all  nations,  human  sacrifices  have  been 
gradually  commuted  for  those  of  animals.  The 
family  of  the  O'Herlebys  in  Bally vorney,  County 
Cork,  used  in  olden  days  to  keep  an  idol,  **  an  image 
of  wood  about  two  feet  high,  carved  and  painted  like 
a  woman  ".^  She  was  the  goddess  of  smallpox,  and 
to  her  a  sheep  was  immolated  on  behalf  of  anyone 
seized  with  that  disease. 

The  third  form  of  Celtic  pagan  survival  is  found 
in  numerous  instances  of  the  adoration  of  water, 
trees,  stones,  and  animals.  Like  the  other  **  Aryan" 
nations,  the  Celts  worshipped  their  rivers.  The 
Dee  received  divine  honours  as  a  war-goddess  with 
the  title  of  Aerfon,  while  the  Ribble,  under  its  name 
of  Belisama,  was  identified  by  the  Romans  with 
Minerva.*  Myths  were  told  of  them,  as  of  the 
sacred  streams  of  Greece.  The  Dee  gave  oracles 
as  to  the  results  of  the  perpetual  wars  between  the 
Welsh  and  the  English;   as  its  stream  encroached 

*  Mitchell :   The  Past  in  the  Present^  pp.  271,  275. 

2  Hton:  Origins  of  English  History,  p.  284. 

3  Gomme :  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  p.  140. 

^  The  word  Dee  probably  meant  ' '  divinity  ".    The  river  was  also  called  D)rfridwy, 
i.e.  "  water  of  the  divinity  ".     See  Rhys:  Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology,  p.  307. 


414         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

either  upon  the  Welsh  or  the  English  side,  so  one 
nation  or  the  other  would  be  victorious.^  The 
Tweed,  like  many  of  the  Greek  rivers,  was  credited 
with  human  descendants.^  That  the  rivers  of  Great 
Britain  received  human  sacrifices  is  clear  from  the 
folklore  concerning  many  of  them.  Deprived  of 
their  expected  offerings,  they  are  believed  to  snatch 
by  stealth  the  human  lives  for  which  they  crave. 
**  River  of  Dart,  River  of  Dart,  every  year  thou 
claimest  a  heart,"  runs  the  Devonshire  folk-song. 
The  Spey,  too,  requires  a  life  yearly,^  but  the  Spirit 
of  the  Ribble  is  satisfied  with  one  victim  at  the  end 
of  every  seven  years.* 

Evidence,  however,  of  the  worship  of  rivers  is 
scanty  compared  with  that  of  the  adoration  of  wells. 
**  In  the  case  of  well- worship,"  says  Mr.  Gomme,  '*  it 
may  be  asserted  with  some  confidence  that  it  prevails 
in  every  county  of  the  three  kingdoms."^  He  finds 
it  most  vital  in  the  Gaelic  counties,  somewhat  less 
so  in  the  British,  and  almost  entirely  wanting  in  the 
Teutonic  south-east.  So  numerous,  indeed,  are  *'holy 
wells"  that  several  monographs  have  been  written 
solely  upon  them.^  In  some  cases  these  wells  were 
resorted  to  for  the  cure  of  diseases;  in  others,  to 
obtain  change  of  weather,  or  ''good  luck".  Offer- 
ings were  made  to  them,  to  propitiate  their  guardian 
gods  or  nymphs.      Pennant  tells  us   that  in  olden 


1  Rhys :  Celtic  Britain,  p.  68. 

*  Rogers:  Social  Life  in  Scotland,  chap,  ill,  p.  336. 
3  Folklore,  chap.  111,  p.  72. 

*  Henderson  :  Folklore  of  Northern  Counties,  p.  265. 
^  Gomme :  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  p.  78. 

*Hope:  Holy  Wells  of  England;  Harvey:  Holy  Wells  of  Ireland. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  415 

times  the  rich  would  sacrifice  one  of  their  horses  at 
a  well  near  Abergeleu,  to  secure  a  blessing  upon  the 
rest.^  Fowls  were  offered  at  St  Tegla's  Well,  near 
Wrexham,  by  epileptic  patients.^  But  of  late  years 
the  well-spirits  have  had  to  be  content  with  much 
smaller  tributes — such  trifles  as  pins,  rags,  coloured 
pebbles,  and  small  coins. 

With  sacred  wells  were  often  connected  sacred 
trees,  to  whose  branches  rags  and  small  pieces  of 
garments  were  suspended  by  their  humble  votaries. 
Sometimes,  where  the  ground  near  the  well  was 
bare  of  vegetation,  bushes  were  artificially  placed 
beside  the  water.  The  same  people  who  venerated 
wells  and  trees  would  pay  equal  adoration  to  sacred 
stones.  Lord  Roden,  describing,  in  1851,  the  Island 
of  Inniskea,  off  the  coast  of  Mayo,  asserts  that  a 
sacred  well  called  **  Derrivla"  and  a  sacred  stone 
called  "  Neevougi",  which  was  kept  carefully  wrapped 
up  in  flannel  and  brought  out  at  certain  periods  to 
be  publicly  adored,  seemed  to  be  the  only  deities 
known  to  that  lone  Atlantic  island's  three  hundred 
inhabitants.^  It  sounds  incredible;  but  there  is 
ample  evidence  of  the  worship  of  fetish  stones  by 
quite  modern  inhabitants  of  our  islands.  The  Clan 
Chattan  kept  such  a  stone  in  the  Isle  of  Arran;  it 
was  believed,  like  the  stone  of  Inniskea,  to  be  able 
to  cure  diseases,  and  was  kept  carefully  **  wrapped 
up  in  fair  linen  cloth,  and  about  that  there  was  a 
piece  of  woollen  cloth".*     Similarly,  too,  the  worship 


1  Sikes:  British  Goblins,  p.  351.  '  Ibid.,  p,  329. 

'  Roden:  Progress  of  the  Reformation  in  Ireland,  pp.  51-54. 
^  Martin :  Description  of  the  Western  Islands,  pp.  166-226. 


4i6         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

of  wells  was  connected  with  the  worship  of  animals. 
At  a  well  in  the  **  Devil's  Causeway",  between  Ruck- 
ley  and  Acton,  in  Shropshire,  lived,  and  perhaps 
still  live,  four  frogs  who  were,  and  perhaps  still  arc, 
believed  to  be  **the  devil  and  his  imps" — that  is  to 
say,  gods  or  demons  of  a  proscribed  idolatry.^  In 
Ireland  such  guardian  spirits  are  usually  fish — trout, 
eels,  or  salmon  thought  to  be  endowed  with  eternal 
life.2  The  genius  of  a  well  in  Banffshire  took  the 
form  of  a  fly,  which  was  also  said  to  be  undying, 
but  to  transmigrate  from  body  to  body.  Its  function 
was  to  deliver  oracles ;  according  as  it  seemed  active 
or  lethargic,  its  votaries  drew  their  omens.^  It  is 
needless  to  multiply  instances  of  a  still  surviving 
cult  of  water,  trees,  stones,  and  animals.  Enough 
to  say  that  it  would  be  easy.  What  concerns  us  is 
that  we  are  face  to  face  in  Britain  with  living  forms 
of  the  oldest,  lowest,  most  primitive  religion  in  the 
world — one  which  would  seem  to  have  been  once 
universal,  and  which,  crouching  close  to  the  earth, 
lets  other  creeds  blow  over  it  without  effacing  it, 
and  outlives  one  and  all  of  them. 

It  underlies  the  three  great  world-religions,  and 
still  forms  the  real  belief  of  perhaps  the  majority 
of  their  titular  adherents.  It  is  characteristic  of  the 
wisdom  of  the  Christian  Church  that,  knowing  its 
power,  she  sought  rather  to  sanctify  than  to  extir- 
pate it.  What  once  were  the  Celtic  equivalents  of 
the  Greek  **  fountains  of  the  nymphs  "  were  conse- 
crated as  *'  holy  wells  ".     The  process  of  so  adopting 

1  Bume :  Shropshire  Folklore,  p.  416. 

*  Gomme :  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  pp.  92-93.  ^  Ibid. ,  p.  102. 


Survivals  of  Celtic  Paganism  417 

them  began  early.  St.  Columba,  when  he  went  in 
the  sixth  century  to  convert  the  Picts,  found  a 
spring  which  they  worshipped  as  a  god;  he  blessed 
it,  and  ''from  that  day  the  demon  separated  from 
the  water  ".^  Indeed,  he  so  sanctified  no  less  than 
three  hundred  such  springs.^  Sacred  stones  were 
equally  taken  under  the  aegis  of  Christianity.  Some 
were  placed  on  the  altars  of  cathedrals,  others  built 
into  consecrated  walls.  The  animal  gods  either 
found  themselves  the  heroes  of  Christian  legends, 
or  where,  for  some  reason,  such  adoption  was  hope- 
less, were  proclaimed  ''  witches'  animals  ",  and  dealt 
with  accordingly.  Such  happened  to  the  hare,  a 
creature  sacred  to  the  ancient  Britons,^  but  now  in 
bad  odour  among  the  superstitious.  The  wren,  too, 
is  hunted  to  death  upon  St.  Stephen's  Day  in  Ire- 
land. Its  crime  is  said  to  be  that  it  has  **a  drop  of 
the  de'il's  blood  in  it ",  but  the  real  reason  is  pro- 
bably to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  Irish  druids 
used  to  draw  auguries  from  its  chirpings. 

We  have  made  in  this  volume  some  attempt  to 
draw  a  picture  of  the  ancient  religion  of  our  earliest 
ancestors,  the  Gaelic  and  the  British  Celts.  We 
have  shown  what  can  be  gathered  of  the  broken 
remnants  of  a  mythology  as  splendid  in  conception 
and  as  brilliant  in  colour  as  that  of  the  Greeks. 
We  have  tried  to  paint  its  divine  figures,  and  to 
retell    their   heroic   stories.      We  have   seen   them 


1  Adamnan's  Vita  Columba. 

^  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes :   Three  Middle  Irish  Homilies. 
*  Caesar :  De  Bello  Gallico,  Book  V,  chap.  xii. 
(B219)  2D 


41 8         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

fall  from  their  shrines,  and  yet,  rising  again,  take  on 
new  lives  as  kings,  or  saints,  or  knights  of  romance, 
and  we  have  caught  fading  glimpses  of  them  sur- 
viving to-day  as  the  **  fairies",  their  rites  still 
cherished  by  worshippers  who  hardly  know  who 
or  why  they  worship.  Of  necessity  this  survey 
has  been  brief  and  incomplete.  Whether  the  great 
edifice  of  the  Celtic  mythology  will  ever  be  wholly 
restored  one  can  at  present  only  speculate.  Its 
colossal  fragments  are  perhaps  too  deeply  buried 
and  too  widely  scattered.  But,  even  as  it  stands 
ruined,  it  is  a  mighty  quarry  from  which  poets  yet 
unborn  will  hew  spiritual  marble  for  houses  not 
made  with  hands. 


APPENDIX 


A   FEW  BOOKS   UPON   CELTIC   MYTHOLOGY 
AND   LITERATURE 

The  object  of  this  short  list  is  merely  to  supplement  the  mar- 
ginal notes  by  pointing  out  to  a  reader  desirous  of  going  deeper 
into  the  subject  the  most  recent  and  accessible  works  upon  it. 
That  they  should  be  accessible  is,  in  its  intention,  the  most  im- 
portant thing;  and  therefore  only  books  easily  and  cheaply  obtain- 
able will  be  mentioned. 

INTRODUCTORY 

Matthew  Arnold. — The  Study  of  Celtic  Literature.  Popular 
Edition.     London,  1891. 

Ernest  Renan. — The  Poetry  of  the  Celtic  Races  (and  other 
studies).  Translated  by  William  G.  Hutchinson.  London, 
1896. 

Two  eloquent  appreciations  of  Celtic  literature. 

Magnus   Maclean,    M.A.,    D.C.L.  —  The   Literature   of  the 
Celts.     Its  History  and  Romance.     London,   1902. 
A  handy  exposition  of  all  the  branches  of  Celtic  literature. 

Elizabeth  A.  Sharp  (editor). — Lyra  Celtica.  An  Anthology 
of  Representative  Celtic  Poetry.  Ancient  Irish,  Alban, 
Gaelic,  Breton,  Cymric,  and  Modern  Scottish  and  Irish 
Celtic  Poetry.  With  introduction  and  notes  by  William 
Sharp.     Edinburgh,   1896. 

Alfred  Nutt. — Celtic  and  Mediaeval  Romance.  No.  i  of  Mr. 
Nutt's  "  Popular  Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folk- 
lore".    London,  1899. 

A  pamphlet  briefly  tracing  the  indebtedness  of  mediceval 
European  literature  to  pre-mediceval  Celtic  sources. 

419 


420         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

HISTORICAL 

H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville. — La  Civilisation  des  Celtes  et 
CELLE  DE  l'Epop^e  homerique.     Paiis,  1899. 

Vol.  VI  of  the  author's  monumental  "  Cours  de  Litter ature 
celtique ." 

Patrick  Weston  Joyce. — A  Social  History  of  Ancient  Ireland, 
treating  of  the  Government,  Military  System,  and  Law; 
Religion,  Learning,  and  Art;  Trades,  Industries,  and  Com- 
merce; Manners,  Customs,  and  Domestic  Life  of  the  Ancient 
Irish  People.     2  vols.     London,  1903. 

Charles  I.  Elton,  F.S.A.  —  Origins  of  English  History. 
Second  edition,  revised.     London,   1890. 

John  Rhys. — Celtic  Britain.     "Early  Britain"  Series.    London, 

1882. 
H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville. — Introduction  a  l'Etude  de  la 

Litterature  celtique.    Vol.  I  of  the  "  Cours  de  Litterature 

celtique".     Paris,  1883. 

Contains^   among  other  information^   the  fullest  and  most 

authentic  account  of  the  druids  and  druidism. 

GAELIC   MYTHOLOGY 

H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville. — Le  Cycle  mythologique  irlan- 
DAis  et  la  Mythologie  celtique.  Vol.  II  of  the  ''Cours 
de  Litterature  celtique".  Paris,  1884.  Translated  into  Eng- 
lish as 
The  Irish  Mythological  Cycle  and  Celtic  Mythology. 
With  notes  by  R.  I.  Best.     Dublin,  1903. 

An  account  of  Irish  mythical  history  and  of  some  of  the 
greater  Gaelic  gods.  With  chapters  on  some  of  the  more 
striking  phases  of  Celtic  belief 

Alfred  Nutt. — The  Voyage  of  Bran,  Son  of  Febal.  An 
Irish  Historic  Legend  of  the  eighth  century.  Edited  by 
Kuno  Meyer.  With  essays  upon  the  Happy  Otherworld  in 
Irish  Myth  and  upon  the  Celtic  Doctrine  of  Rebirth.  Vol. 
I— The  Happy  Otherworld.  Vol.  II— The  Celtic  Doctrine 
of  Rebirth.  Grimm  Library,  Vols.  IV  and  VI.  London, 
1895-1897. 


Appendix  421 

Contains^  among  other  notable  contributions  to  the  study  of 
Celtic  mythology^  an  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann^  a  subject  briefly  treated  in  the  same  author^ s 
The  Fairy  Mythology  of  Shakespeare.     No.  6  of  "  Popu- 
lar Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore  ".    London, 
1900. 
Patrick   Weston   Joyce. — Old   Celtic   Romances.      Translated 
from  the  Gaelic.     London,   1894. 

A  retelling  in  popular  modern  style  of  some  of  the  more  im- 
portant mythological  and  Fenian  stories. 

Lady  Gregory. — Gods  and  Fighting  Men.  The  story  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danaan  and  of  the  Fianna  of  Erin.  Arranged 
and  put  into  English  by  Lady  Gregory.  With  a  Preface  by 
W.  B.  Yeats.     London,   1904. 

Covers  much  the  same  ground  as  Mr.  Joyce^s  book^  but  in 
more  literary  manner. 

Alfred  Nutt. — Ossian  and  the  Ossianic  Literature.  No.  3 
of  "Popular  Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folk- 
lore".    London,   1899. 

A  short  survey  of  the  literature  connected  with  the  Fenians. 

John  Gregorson  Campbell,  Minister  of  Tiree.  —  The  Fians. 
Stories,  poems,  and  traditions  of  Fionn  and  his  Warrior 
Band,  collected  entirely  from  oral  sources.  With  introduc- 
tion and  bibliographical  notes  by  Alfred  Nutt.  Vol.  IV  f>i 
"Waifs  and  Strays  of  Celtic  Tradition".  London,  1891. 
An  account  of  the  Fenians  from  the  Scottish-Gaelic  side. 

Alfred  Nutt. — Cuchulainn  the  Irish  Achilles.  No.  8  of 
"  Popular  Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore ". 
London,   1900. 

A  brief  but  excellent  introduction  to  the  Cuchulainn  cycle. 

Lady  Gregory. — Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne.  The  story  of 
the  Men  of  the  Red  Branch  of  Ulster.  Arranged  and  put 
into  English  by  Lady  Gregory.  With  a  Preface  by  W.  B. 
Yeats.     London,   1902. 

A  retelling  in  poetic  prose  of  the  tales  connected  with  Cuchu- 
lainn. 

Eleanor  Hull. — The  Cuchullin  Saga  in  Irish  Literature. 
Being  a  collection  of  stories  relating  to  the  Hero  Cuchullin, 
translated  from  the  Irish  by  various  scholars.     Compiled  and 


42  2         Mythology  of  the  British  Islands 

edited  with  introduction  and  notes  by  Eleanor  Hull.  With 
Map  of  Ancient  Ireland.  Grimm  Library,  Vol.  VIII. 
London,   1898. 

A  series  of  Cuchulainn  stories  from  the  ancient  Irish  manu- 
scripts.    More  literal  than  Lady  Gregory's  adaptation, 
H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville. — L'Epop^e  Celtique  en  Irlande. 
Vol.  V  of  the  *'Cours  de  Litterature  celtique".     Paris,  1892. 

A  collection^  translated  into  French^  of  some  of  the  principal 
stories  of  the  Cuchulainn  cycle^  with  various  appendices  upon 
Gaelic  mythological  subjects. 

L.  Winifred  Faraday,  M.A. — The  Cattle  Raid  of  Cualgne 
(Tain  Bo  Cuailgne).  An  old  Irish  prose-epic  translated  for 
the  first  time  from  the  Leabhar  na  h-Uidhri  and  the  Yellow 
Book  of  Lecan.  Grimm  Library,  Vol.  XVI.  London, 
1904. 

A  strictly  literal  rendering  of  the  central  episode  of  the 
Cuchulainn  cycle. 

BRITISH   MYTHOLOGY 

Ivor  B.  John. — The  Mabinogion.     No.  i  i  of  "  Popular  Studies 

in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore".     London,  1901. 

A  pamphlet  introduction  to  the  Mabinogion  literature. 

Lady  Charlotte  Guest. — The  Mabinogion.     From  the  Welsh  of 
the  Llyfr  Coch  o  Hergest  (the  Red  Book  of  Hergest) 
in  the  library  of  Jesus  College,  Oxford.     Translated,  with 
notes,  by  Lady  Charlotte  Guest. 
First  edition.     Text,  translation,  and  notes,  3  vols.,  1849. 
Translation  and  notes  only,  i  vol.,  1877. 
The  Boys'  Mabinogion,  1881. 
Cheap  editions  of  this  classic  have  been  lately  issued.     One 
may  obtain  it  in  Mr.  Nutfs  handsome  little  volume;  as  one  of 
Denfs  "  Temple  Classics ^^y  or  in  the  "  Welsh  Library". 

J.  Loth. — Les  Mabinogion,  traduits  en  entier  pour  la  premiere 
fois  en  frangais  avec  un  commentaire  explicatif  et  des  notes 
critiques.  2  vols.  Vols.  Ill  and  IV  of  De  Jubainville's 
"Cours  de  Litterature  celtique".     Paris,   1889. 

A  more  exact  translation  than  that  of  Lady  Guest^  with 
notes  embodying  more  recent  scholarship. 


Appendix  423 

J.  A.  Giles,  D.C.L. — Old  English  Chronicles,  including  .  .  . 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  British   History,   Gildas,   Nennius 
.  .  .  Edited,  with  illustrative  notes,  by  J.  A.  Giles,  D.C.L. 
**Bohn's  Antiquarian  Library".     London,   1901. 
The  most  accessible  edition  of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth. 

Sir  Thomas  Malory. — The  Morte  Darthur.  Edited  by  Dr. 
H.  Oskar  Sommer.  Vol.  I— the  Text.  Vol.  II— Glossary, 
Index,  &c.  Vol.  Ill — Study  on  the  Sources.  London, 
1889-1891. 

Vol,  I  of  this,  the  best  text  of  the  Morte  Darthur,  can  be 
obtained  separately. 

Jessie  L.  Weston. — King  Arthur  and  his  Knights.  A  sur- 
vey of  Arthurian  romance.  No.  4  of  "Popular  Studies  in 
Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore".     London,   1899. 

Alfred  Nutt. — The  Legends  of  the  Holy  Grail.     No.  14  of 
"Popular  Studies  in  Mythology,  Romance,  and  Folklore" 
London,  1902. 

Useful  introductions  to  a  more  special  study  of  Arthurian 
literature. 

COMPARATIVE  STUDY  OF  CELTIC  MYTHOLOGY 

John  Rhys. — Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Re- 
ligion as  illustrated  by  Celtic  Heathendom.  "The 
Hibbert  Lectures  for  1886."     London,  1898. 

John  Rhys. — Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend.  Oxford, 
1901. 

These  two  volumes  are  the  most  important  attempts  yet  made 
towards  a  scientific  and  comprehensive  study  of  the  Celtic 
mythology. 

CELTIC  FAIRY  AND  FOLK  LORE 

GAELIC 

T.  Crofton  Croker. — Fairy  Legends  and  Traditions  of  the 
South  of  Ireland. 

This  book  is  one  of  the  earliest,  and,  if  not  the  most  scientific, 
perhaps  the  most  attractive  of  the  many  collections  of  Irish 
fairy-lore.     Later  compilations  are  Mr,    William  Larminie^s 


